“China refuses scheming against NK with the US," read the front page banner headline. Patrick Morgan, a leading strategic analyst at the University of California, writes that the North has succeeded in looking "like Mighty Mouse" because its nuclear deterrence has not been tested by highly motivated potential attackers. "Why not? Because a collapse of the North seems at least as dangerous, and much more likely, than its use of nuclear weapons," Morgan says. The good news, however, is that the North's estimated eight nuclear missiles, of questionable functionality, are not nearly enough to embolden the North to deliberately risk outright military confrontation. "Pyongyang has never displayed intense dedication to anything except survival; it will not initiate a war to die for its principles," Morgan says. Peter Hayes, at the Nautilus Institute, recalls being in North Korea in 1998, when the country was also on a war footing. "The whole country just went berserk. It was like throwing petrol on an ant hill," he said. "Presumably [the war ritual] is a positive for the regime, or they wouldn't do it."
Two weeks after North Korea shelled a South Korean island, the rivals are still trading threats of attacks and counterattacks. Tensions remain at their highest in more than a decade, and though neither side is backing down, all-out war is unlikely. “The fact that both North and South are having to prove themselves militarily and conduct live-fire tests very close to each other’s borders just increases the likelihood that there could be an errant shell or just a war of nerves that could lead to crossing the line once again,” said Peter Beck, a research fellow at Keio University in Tokyo. “Now that the North has done it once, it’s not going to surprise me if they do it again.” Still, the doomsday scenario of all-out war across the world’s most militarized border is unlikely, he and other experts said. South Korea’s moves to bolster its military readiness since the attack reduce the risk of the outbreak of a full-fledged war, said Daniel Pinkston, a Seoul-based analyst with the International Crisis Group think tank. North Korea is rich in manpower but poor in hardware and, he said, it knows that “further provocation will come at a cost.” The North’s game has always been to provoke just enough to be able to extract what it needs from the South and the rest of the world. Since 2003, Pyongyang had been engaged in negotiations with five other nations to dismantle its nuclear program in exchange for fuel oil and other concessions. After backing out of that deal last year, North Korea — struggling to feed its people, slapped with sanctions — has been looking for a way back to the negotiating table. Seoul and Washington, however, say giving into Pyongyang’s ploys would only reward bad behavior and have resisted restarting the talks. Complicating matters is that North Korea is handling a sensitive transfer of power from leader Kim Jong Il to his young, untested son. While that uncertainly may make North Korea more unpredictable, it also means it craves stability more than ever.
United States' relationship with China is a healthy mix of competition and cooperation and America does not view it in terms of any conflict, Vice President Joe Biden has said. "We do not view our relationship and future relations with China in terms of conflict or the talk of inevitable conflict," Biden said yesterday. "We view it in terms of a healthy mix of competition and cooperation, a competition that we welcome. We like to compete. Competition is good for both of us, as long as the game is fair," he said. Biden said that to reverse its declining growth, China would have to make reforms which will not only help the largest Asian economy but also the region and the world. Chinese leadership has concluded that their country needs to shift to a more consumer-driven economy, he said. "They've concluded they have to create a market-based, well- regulated financial system. They have concluded they need to liberalise their exchange rates," he said. Noting that economic growth critically depends on peace and stability, he said that is why there needs to be 21st-century rules of the road, not only in the economic sphere but also with regard to security, with regard to maritime disputes. "It's critical that all nations have a clear understanding of what constitutes acceptable international behaviour. That means no intimidation, no coercion, no aggression, and a commitment from all parties to reduce the risk of mistake and miscalculation," Biden said. "So it's in everyone's interest that there be freedom of navigation, unimpeded lawful commerce, respect for international laws and norms and peaceful resolution of territorial disputes," he said. Biden encouraged China and ASEAN to quickly reach an agreement on a code of conduct in the South China Sea, setting clear rules as the first step to manage disputes.
As a result of the recently concluded U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue (S&ED) the relationship between Washington and Beijing has not only stabilized, but has taken a major step forward—make that major steps. This year’s S&ED builds on the new momentum in the relationship spurred by the June presidential summit in Sunnylands, California.
The maintenance of peace, stability, the free flow of commerce, and of U.S. influence in this dynamic region will depend in part on an underlying balance of military capability and presence. Over the long term, China’s emergence as a regional power will have the potential to affect the U.S. economy and our security in a variety of ways. Our two countries have a strong stake in peace and stability in East Asia and an interest in building a cooperative bilateral relationship. However, the growth of China’s military power must be accompanied by greater clarity of its strategic intentions in order to avoid causing friction in the region. The United States will continue to make the necessary investments to ensure that we maintain regional access and the ability to operate freely in keeping with our treaty obligations and with international law. Working closely with our network of allies and partners, we will continue to promote a rules-based international order that ensures underlying stability and encourages the peaceful rise of new powers, economic dynamism, and constructive defense cooperation....
China and the US will never be friends. But they need each other desperately. Last week's American elections did nothing to alter this key fact of the Asia-Pacific century. America re-elected the President, Barack Obama, despite record high unemployment because the country agreed now is not the time for fiscal austerity. Meanwhile, the Republicans will have to change their symbol from the elephant to the dinosaur unless they can expand their base beyond southern white men. The elections didn't change the balance of power in Washington, so continuity in policy seems a given. Expect more Band-Aid solutions to the US's fiscal woes born of an implicit belief the country can grow its way out of debt. Obama's strategic focus abroad will be on rebalancing American foreign policy towards Asia with a view to influencing the trajectory of China's rise along US lines. But Obama knows the American and Chinese economies are codependent. More active American presence in Asia will be matched with a continuing resolve to ensure tensions with China do not spiral out of control. Advertisement Job one for Obama II is the fiscal cliff the US could walk off on New Year's Eve when Bush's post-September 11 income tax cuts and Obama's post-global financial crisis payroll tax cuts will expire and more than $100 billion a year in automatic spending cuts will kick in. This would halve the US budget deficit. But it would also tip the country, and most likely the world, immediately back into recession. Despite the vitriol and rancour of the election campaign, few in Washington want to commit suicide. The most likely outcome is a new deal in the shadow of Christmas. On the tax side, the path of least resistance is to extend the Bush cuts for individuals earning more than $250,000, so long as they qualify as small business owners. With respect to spending, expect a deal that pushes the pain of cuts further into the future, with lots of grand statements about the need to make the US's true fiscal nightmare, its government-funded aged healthcare program Medicare, more sustainable. This makes more sense than you might think. The US is demographically the third-youngest country in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and its welfare state is relatively small. The US remains the world's innovation engine and its immigration magnet. Betting on a return to the 3 per cent-plus economic growth needed to make inroads into public debt seems reasonable. Of course, like the rest of the world, the US's economic future depends on China's rise. The US benefits from cheap Chinese imports, cheap Chinese credit and the explosive growth of the Chinese market. But China needs the US equally, not only to buy its goods but also for the technology and know-how it gets from American multinationals operating there. It is this economic codependence that means China and the US will never enter into a second cold war. But Sino-American relations will always be stressful because of the very different world views of the two superpowers.
According to Shang-Jin Wei, a professor of finance and economics at Columbia Business School and the director of Columbia's Jerome A. Chazen Institute of International Business, Lew’s trip was important to Chinese leaders. “This is a brilliant (and a relatively low cost) move to demonstrate the importance of the bilateral relationship,” Wei says. Related: U.S. vs. China: DC Dysfunction Gives People's Republic an Edge He argues that the U.S.-Chinese relationship – although fraught at the moment – is mutually beneficial, more so than the two governments may realize. Each country is “really dependent on the other for selling goods, proving services, exchanging financial assets…they depend on each other,” Wei says in the accompanying clip. The Chinese will be paying close attention to Lew and his budget policies because of the potential implications to their economy, Wei notes. “The sustainability of the U.S. debt problem is of enormous concerns to the Chinese, as China is a major holder of U.S. government debt,” Wei emphasizes. “Any hint of U.S. debt repayment problem or U.S. dollar depreciation could mean major financial losses to the Chinese. So the Chinese very much hope that the U.S. can successfully address its debt sustainability problem.”
President Obama has spoken of a pivot to Asia, followed by the US Defense Department's plan to move most of the US naval capability to the Asia Pacific to counter the rise of China. We can feel that the US military, in spite of the turmoil in Syria, Egypt and the Middle East, is re-asserting its influence in the Asia-Pacific. The US and China are now engaging in a full-scale currency war. A physical war could be the inevitable course. A rise of China threatens the US dollar as the world's reserve currency and the US supremacy. On China's side, we can assume that the Chinese leadership has ordered a full preparation for a war with the United States. China has secretly built up its military capability, with modern weapons and sophisticated technology. China said it is ready to develop an anti-AirSea Battle strategy. China's President Xi Jingping has urged the military to prepare for the war and to fight to win.
According to U.S. officials, during the Jacobson-Maduro talks — in which both sides expressed hopes for a speedy recovery of Chávez — the Venezuelan vice president offered to exchange ambassadors on occasion of the beginning of President Barack Obama’s second term. Jacobson, in turn, is said to have proposed a step-by-step approach to improve bilateral relations, starting with greater cooperation in counter-narcotics, counter-terrorism and energy issues. Under the three-step U.S. proposal, the first test to restore bilateral relations would be Venezuela’s acceptance of a visit by the top DEA regional supervisor based in Colombia, to map a plan of greater cooperation on anti-narcotic issues. While there are anti-narcotics officials at the U.S. Embassy in Caracas, such a visit would give bilateral talks greater diplomatic weight, officials say.¶ My opinion: Both sides may have powerful reasons to seek a thaw as they prepare for the possibility of a post-Chávez era. U.S. officials would like Venezuela to allow greater cooperation on drugs, terrorism and energy, regardless of who is in power, to stop the country from becoming a drug-traffickers’ paradise.¶  Maduro, in turn, may be buying time to consolidate his leadership at home. A hard-liner who is very close to Cuba’s dictatorship, Maduro may have talked to Jacobson to send a message within the polarized Chavista movement that he’s in charge, before any internal power struggle in Venezuela breaks out in the open.
I couldn’t be happier that Mexico’s economy is rebounding. After barely 2% average annual growth between 2000 and 2010, the country’s GDP expanded almost 4% in 2011 and 2012. Investment is booming and the middle class is enlarging. Mexico’s manufacturing exports lead Latin America, and its trade as a share of GDP tops China’s. Its No. 53 spot on the World Bank’s ease-of-doing-business rankings far outshines the No. 126 grade of its main regional rival, Brazil; it has signed more free trade agreements (44) than any other country, and it’s enrolling more engineering students than any south of the Rio Grande. As I noted a year ago, it’s a trend well worth applauding.
Panama's seizure of the freighter, which saw its North Korean captain try to commit suicide and 35 crewmen arrested after resisting police efforts to intercept the ship in Panamanian waters, was badly timed for officials working on baby steps toward a limited detente between the U.S. and Cuba.¶ High-ranking Cubans were in Washington on Wednesday for migration talks that are supposed to be held every six months but have been on ice since January 2011, as the nations remain at odds on issues like Cuba's imprisonment of U.S. government subcontractor Alan Gross.¶ "I don't think you can sugarcoat this," said Ted Piccone, senior fellow and deputy director for foreign policy at the Washington-based Brookings Institution. "You have a suspicious cargo of weapons going to a heavily sanctioned state, and this is bad for U.S.-Cuba relations. The timing, the same week as the restart of long postponed migration talks, couldn't be worse." In the past those discussions have provided a rare opportunity to discuss other issues informally in one of the few open channels of dialogue between the countries. U.S. and Cuban representatives last month also sat down for talks on resuming direct mail service. Earlier this year, a U.S. judge allowed a convicted Cuban intelligence agent to return to the island rather than complete his parole in the United States. And there have been whispers that Washington could remove Cuba from its annual list of state sponsors of terrorism.¶ On Tuesday, Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Florida Republican, urged a suspension of the migration talks.¶ "At a minimum this development will decrease the chances of any change in U.S. policy," Piccone said. "Or at least postpone changes that have been discussed quietly and publicly for some time in Washington."
As Panamanian authorities continue to search the Chong Chon Gang -- a freighter with its own checkered past -- they are asking the U.S. and United Kingdom to send teams to help them identify the weapons, and will invite a special commission from the United Nations to determine whether the shipment violates the organization's North Korea weapons ban.¶ In the meantime, experts don't expect the episode will have a lasting effect diplomatically on either country -- North Korea is already "sanctioned to the hilt," says Ellemann, and Cuba's relations with the U.S. are thawing after decades of tension."There are a good number of people who believe that the sanctions against Cuba are very outdated and that it's just a matter of time before they're lifted, and I don't see this changing that," Ellemann told CNN.
Would it be rational for terrorists to use nuclear weapons? An act is rational only relative to the goals and assumptions of the actor. So, to ask whether nuclear terrorism is rational for a terrorist group is to ask whether it is rational relative to its goals and assumptions. Normally, a terrorist group has goals and assumptions different from those of the ordinary person. Still, there is some reason to think that nuclear use would not be rational for the terrorist, even from the terrorist's point of view. For one thing, the main concern of terrorists seems to be to make their grievances known, not just to kill people. Brian Jenkins notes: "Simply killing a lot of people has seldom been a terrorist objective.... Terrorists want a lot of people watching, not a lot of people dead." He bolsters this point by observing that many terrorists are morally opposed to indiscriminate violence, given that "they regard a government as their opponent. not the people," and they do not want to alienate the people. There are other reasons to think that nuclear terrorism would be irrational from the terrorist's perspective. The cohesion of a terrorist group is of great importance to the group, and the use of nuclear weapons risks the loss of that cohesion. Given the revulsion some in the group might feel toward such an act, the decision to use nuclear weapons might shatter the group. Moreover, terrorists might well discover the same truth that states have discovered, namely, that nuclear weapons are too powerful. For the question arises: What demands could nuclear terrorists make that would correspond in magnitude to what they threaten, demands that they could be assured that the state would carry out, given the temporary nature of the nuclear threat they would pose?
It is essential to note, however, that making a bomb is an extraordinarily difficult task. Thus, a set of counterterrorism and nuclear experts interviewed in 2004 by Dafna Linzer for the Washington Post pointed to the "enormous technical and logistical obstacles confronting would-be nuclear terrorists, and to the fact that neither al-Qaeda nor any other group has come close to demonstrating the means to overcome them." Allison nonetheless opines that a dedicated terrorist group, al-Qaeda in particular, could get around all the problems in time and eventually steal, produce, or procure a "crude" bomb or device,one that he however acknowledges would be "large, cumbersome, unsafe, unreliable, unpredictable, and inefficient" (2004, 97; see also Bunn and Wier 2006, 139; Pluta and Zimmerman 2006, 61).
It is also worth noting that, although nuclear weapons have been around now for well over half a century, no state has ever given another state--even a close ally, much less a terrorist group--a nuclear weapon (or chemical, biological, or radiological one either, for that matter) that the recipient could use independently. For example, during the Cold War, North Korea tried to acquire nuclear weapons from its close ally, China, and was firmly refused (Oberdorfer 2005; see also Pillar 2003, xxi). There could be some danger from private (or semi-private) profiteers, like the network established by Pakistani scientist A. Q. Khan. However, its activities were rather easily penetrated by intelligence agencies (the CIA, it is very likely, had agents within the network), and the operation was abruptly closed down when it seemed to be the right time (Langewiesche 2007, 169-72).
I patiently reply to these correspondents that nuclear war would not be the end of the world. I then point to studies showing that “nuclear winter” has no scientific basis, that fallout from a nuclear war would not kill all life on earth. Surprisingly, few of my correspondents are convinced. They prefer apocalyptic myths created by pop scientists, movie producers and journalists. If Dr. Carl Sagan once said “nuclear winter” would follow a nuclear war, then it must be true. If radiation wipes out mankind in a movie, then that’s what we can expect in real life.
CANBERRA — Coral is again flourishing in the crater left by the largest nuclear weapon ever detonated by the United States, 54 years after the blast on Bikini Atoll, marine scientists said Tuesday. A team of research divers visited Bravo crater, ground zero for the test of a thermonuclear weapon in the Marshall Islands on March 1, 1954, and found large numbers of fish and coral growing, although some species appeared to be locally extinct. "I didn't know what to expect, some kind of moonscape perhaps, but it was incredible," Zoe Richards, from Australia's James Cook University, said about the team's trip to the atoll in the South Pacific. "We saw communities not too far from any coral reef, with plenty of fish, corals and action going on, some really striking individual colonies," she said. The 15-megaton hydrogen bomb was 1,000 times more powerful than the weapon that destroyed Hiroshima, Japan, in 1945, and it vaporized islands with temperatures hitting 55,000 degrees Celsius, or about 99,000 degrees Fahrenheit. The Bikini blast shook islands as far away as 200 kilometers, or 125 miles. The resulting fireball was 7 kilometers wide, and it left a crater 73 meters deep, or 240 feet. The mushroom cloud rose 100 kilometers over the South Pacific, and radioactive fallout reached Australia and Japan. Richards, from the Australian government-backed Center of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, said the research team from Germany, Italy, Hawaii, Australia and the Marshall Islands found corals up to 8 meters high and some had trunks 30 centimeters thick, about a foot. "It was fascinating," Richards said. "I've never seen corals growing like trees outside of the Marshall Islands." While above-water areas remained contaminated and unfit for human habitation, healthy underwater species probably travelled to Bikini Atoll on strong currents from nearby Rongelap Atoll, which was not bombed in a series of 23 tests from 1946 to 1958.
Sixteen prominent scientists recently signed an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal expressing their belief that the theory of global warming is not supported by science. This has not been getting the attention it deserves because politicians (looking at you Al Gore) are frankly embarrassed to admit that they are wrong about the phenomenon known as global warming. Not only has our planet stopped warming, but we may be headed toward a vast cooling period. New data shows that in fact the Earth has not warmed at all over the last 15 years. In fact, the Daily Mail reports that the Met Office and the University of East Anglia Climatic Research Unit, after taking data from nearly 30,000 stations around the world, have found that the earth stopped warming in 1997. The report suggests we are headed toward a new solar cycle, Cycle 25, which NASA scientists have predicted will be significantly cooler than Cycle 24 which we are in now. This data largely contradicts the accepted theory among the public that carbon dioxide pollution is causing global warming and even proposes that we are actually heading toward global cooling. I share the same frustration in the political and scientific community that the sixteen scientists express. Why did we all hop on board the global warming bandwagon started by politicians when the scientific community didn’t back it? Since 1998, 31,000 scientists have signed a petitionagreeing with the fact that there is no scientific evidence or consensus that man-made global warming exists while the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has the support of only 2,500 scientists. Yet, for some reason it is accepted that global warming is scientifically undeniable. Part of this is due to Al Gore’s 2006 documentary, An Inconvenient Truth, which has championed the cause to stop global warming and was shown throughout America including in classrooms. Gore dramatized the effects of carbon dioxide on climate change and some say he even fabricated the evidence shown in the film. But, the 2007 documentary, The Great Global Warming Swindle, (which I am sure you have never heard of) received no such publicity despite the fact that its arguments against global warming were backed by scientists, academics, writers and environmentalists.The film's major point is that the real data shows that carbon dioxide decrease or increase follows temperature decrease or increase -- not the other way around. The film cites that when the earth gets warmer, the ocean releases carbon dioxide and when the earth gets cooler, the ocean absorbs carbon dioxide. It is estimated that we have spent around $106.7 billion of taxpayer money from 2003-2010 to try to understand and “fix” global warming. And the spending doesn’t stop there. The same research shows the government has proposed to spend around $1.4 billion in 2012 alone on climate change issues. The fact of the matter is we are spending egregious amounts of money on an issue that there is no scientific evidence to back. Whether you believe in global warming or not, I urge you to do the research. Don’t just listen to politicians. Look at the opinions of scientists, look at the data and form your own opinion because the debate over whether or not global warming exists is becoming too expensive to not be educated on it. I am confident that once people actually look at the data, they will come to the same conclusions I have. And any believers in global warming after that are welcome to fly out to Alaska and explain their opinions to the residents of Jim River which nearly reached the record for the coldest temperature in the U.S. yesterday before their thermometer failed (most likely because it was too cold) one degree shy of the record at -79 degrees Fahrenheit.
Sixteen prominent scientists recently signed an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal expressing their belief that the theory of global warming is not supported by science. This has not been getting the attention it deserves because politicians (looking at you Al Gore) are frankly embarrassed to admit that they are wrong about the phenomenon known as global warming. Not only has our planet stopped warming, but we may be headed toward a vast cooling period. New data shows that in fact the Earth has not warmed at all over the last 15 years. In fact, the Daily Mail reports that the Met Office and the University of East Anglia Climatic Research Unit, after taking data from nearly 30,000 stations around the world, have found that the earth stopped warming in 1997. The report suggests we are headed toward a new solar cycle, Cycle 25, which NASA scientists have predicted will be significantly cooler than Cycle 24 which we are in now. This data   largely contradicts the accepted theory among the public that carbon dioxide pollution is causing global warming and even proposes that we are actually heading toward global cooling. I share the same frustration in the political and scientific community that the sixteen scientists express. Why did we all hop on board the global warming bandwagon started by politicians when the scientific community didn’t back it? Since 1998, 31,000 scientists have signed a petition agreeing with the fact that there is no scientific evidence or consensus that man-made global warming exists while the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has the support of only 2,500 scientists. Yet, for some reason it is accepted that global warming is scientifically undeniable. Part of this is due to Al Gore’s 2006 documentary, An Inconvenient Truth, which has championed the cause to stop global warming and was shown throughout America including in classrooms. Gore dramatized the effects of carbon dioxide on climate change and some say he even fabricated the evidence shown in the film. But, the 2007 documentary, The Great Global Warming Swindle, (which I am sure you have never heard of) received no such publicity despite the fact that its arguments against global warming were backed by scientists, academics, writers and environmentalists. The film's major point is that the real data shows that carbon dioxide decrease or increase follows temperature decrease or increase -- not the other way around. The film cites that when the earth gets warmer, the ocean releases carbon dioxide and when the earth gets cooler, the ocean absorbs carbon dioxide. It is estimated that we have spent around $106.7 billion of taxpayer money from 2003-2010 to try to understand and “fix” global warming. And the spending doesn’t stop there. The same research shows the government has proposed to spend around $1.4 billion in 2012 alone on climate change issues. The fact of the matter is we are spending egregious amounts of money on an issue that there is no scientific evidence to back.
Perhaps because there’s little incentive for scientists to do anything but emphasize the negative and the destructive. Alarming news often leads to government funding, funding generates research, and research is the key to scientists’ professional advancement. Good news threatens that arrangement. This is the reality that all scientists confront: every issue, be it global warming, cancer or AIDS, competes with other issues for a limited amount of government research funding. And, here in Washington, no one ever received a major research grant by stating that his or her particular issue might not be such a problem after all.
The fact is that Kilimanjaro’s glaciers vary greatly, with or without global warming. And there are dozens of other stories where scientists exaggerate global warming, ignore its positive aspects, and where the media only report the bad news. In August 2000, the New York Times headlined on the front page that “The North Pole is Melting” and that “the last time scientists could be certain that the Pole was awash in water was more than 50 million years ago.” It turns out that two United Nations scientists were onboard a Russian icebreaker serving as a tourist ship when they encountered water at the North Pole. They told this to the newspaper without bothering to check the historical record. Open water is occasionally found at the North Pole at the end of summer. The Times ultimately retracted the story — but that retraction appeared far away from the front page. Why didn’t the polar scientists check first before calling the paper? And why didn’t the New York Times check the facts before publishing? The answers are obvious. Stories like this sell newspapers and generate government research grants. There’s no incentive in telling the larger truth, not for science, not for the media, and certainly not for those public officials who lavish funding on global warming science.
Ratings agency Standard & Poor's has upgraded its outlook for the US economy to stable from negative, two years after its controversial downgrade caused a political and economic firestorm. S&P said a strengthening US economy and the dollar's status as the world's "key reserve currency" contributed to its decision to reverse 2011's unprecedented downgrade. The rating agency assigned the US AA+ long-term and A-1+ short-term ratings. "We believe that the US monetary authorities have both the strong ability and willingness to support sustainable economic growth and to attenuate major economic or financial shocks," the agency said in its report. S&P praised the Federal Reserve's "timely and effective actions to lessen the impact of major shocks since the Great Recession". The report is a major reversal from S&P's shock downgrade of US debt in August 2011. That report said the weakened "effectiveness, stability, and predictability" of US policy making and political institutions was exacerbating the country's economic malaise. In its upgrade the agency warned that the ability of politicians to address the country's medium-term fiscal challenges remains hampered by partisan bickering in Washington and "fundamentally opposing views by the two main political parties on the optimal size of government. But S&P said it saw signs of hope in the bipartisan agreement reached to deal with the "fiscal cliff" at the end of last year. The report comes after a series of lackluster economic figures have suggested the economic recovery remains fragile. Last week the Labor Department reported that the US economy had added just 175,000 new jobs in May and the unemployment rate ticked up to 7.5% from 7.4% in April. Last week the Institute of Supply Management reported its manufacturing activity index fell in May to its lowest since June 2009. The S&P report concludes that while difficulties remain, the long-term outlook for the US economy is bright. "The stable outlook indicates our appraisal that some of the downside risks to our 'AA+' rating on the US have receded to the point that the likelihood that we will lower the rating in the near term is less than one in three. We do not see material risks to our favorable view of the flexibility and efficacy of US monetary policy. We believe the US economic performance will match or exceed its peers' in the coming years," the agency concludes.
VI. Discussion and conclusions A. Implications for our theories of political instability and conflict The state is not a prize?—Warlord politics and the state prize logic lie at the center of the most influential models of conflict, state development, and political transitions in economics and political science. Yet we see no evidence for this idea in economic shocks, even when looking at the friendliest cases: fragile and unconstrained states dominated by extractive commodity revenues. Indeed, we see the opposite correlation: if anything, higher rents from commodity prices weakly 22 lower the risk and length of conflict. Perhaps shocks are the wrong test. Stocks of resources could matter more than price shocks (especially if shocks are transitory). But combined with emerging evidence that war onset is no more likely even with rapid increases in known oil reserves (Humphreys 2005; Cotet and Tsui 2010) we regard the state prize logic of war with skepticism.17 Our main political economy models may need a new engine. Naturally, an absence of evidence cannot be taken for evidence of absence. Many of our conflict onset and ending results include sizeable positive and negative effects.18 Even so, commodity price shocks are highly influential in income and should provide a rich source of identifiable variation in instability. It is difficult to find a better-measured, more abundant, and plausibly exogenous independent variable than price volatility. Moreover, other time-varying variables, like rainfall and foreign aid, exhibit robust correlations with conflict in spite of suffering similar empirical drawbacks and generally smaller sample sizes (Miguel et al. 2004; Nielsen et al. 2011). Thus we take the absence of evidence seriously. Do resource revenues drive state capacity?—State prize models assume that rising revenues raise the value of the capturing the state, but have ignored or downplayed the effect of revenues on self-defense. We saw that a growing empirical political science literature takes just such a revenue-centered approach, illustrating that resource boom times permit both payoffs and repression, and that stocks of lootable or extractive resources can bring political order and stability. This countervailing effect is most likely with transitory shocks, as current revenues are affected while long term value is not. Our findings are partly consistent with this state capacity effect. For example, conflict intensity is most sensitive to changes in the extractive commodities rather than the annual agricultural crops that affect household incomes more directly. The relationship only holds for conflict intensity, however, and is somewhat fragile. We do not see a large, consistent or robust decline in conflict or coup risk when prices fall. A reasonable interpretation is that the state prize and state capacity effects are either small or tend to cancel one another out. Opportunity cost: Victory by default?—Finally, the inverse relationship between prices and war intensity is consistent with opportunity cost accounts, but not exclusively so. As we noted above, the relationship between intensity and extractive commodity prices is more consistent with the state capacity view. Moreover, we shouldn’t mistake an inverse relation between individual aggression and incomes as evidence for the opportunity cost mechanism. The same correlation is consistent with psychological theories of stress and aggression (Berkowitz 1993) and sociological and political theories of relative deprivation and anomie (Merton 1938; Gurr 1971). Microempirical work will be needed to distinguish between these mechanisms. Other reasons for a null result.—Ultimately, however, the fact that commodity price shocks have no discernible effect on new conflict onsets, but some effect on ongoing conflict, suggests that political stability might be less sensitive to income or temporary shocks than generally believed. One possibility is that successfully mounting an insurgency is no easy task. It comes with considerable risk, costs, and coordination challenges. Another possibility is that the counterfactual is still conflict onset. In poor and fragile nations, income shocks of one type or another are ubiquitous. If a nation is so fragile that a change in prices could lead to war, then other shocks may trigger war even in the absence of a price shock. The same argument has been made in debunking the myth that price shocks led to fiscal collapse and low growth in developing nations in the 1980s.19 B. A general problem of publication bias? More generally, these findings should heighten our concern with publication bias in the conflict literature. Our results run against a number of published results on commodity shocks and conflict, mainly because of select samples, misspecification, and sensitivity to model assumptions, and, most importantly, alternative measures of instability. Across the social and hard sciences, there is a concern that the majority of published research findings are false (e.g. Gerber et al. 2001). Ioannidis (2005) demonstrates that a published finding is less likely to be true when there is a greater number and lesser pre-selection of tested relationships; there is greater flexibility in designs, definitions, outcomes, and models; and when more teams are involved in the chase of statistical significance. The cross-national study of conflict is an extreme case of all these. Most worryingly, almost no paper looks at alternative dependent variables or publishes systematic robustness checks. Hegre and Sambanis (2006) have shown that the majority of published conflict results are fragile, though they focus on timeinvariant regressors and not the time-varying shocks that have grown in popularity. We are also concerned there is a “file drawer problem” (Rosenthal 1979). Consider this decision rule: scholars that discover robust results that fit a theoretical intuition pursue the results; but if results are not robust the scholar (or referees) worry about problems with the data or empirical strategy, and identify additional work to be done. If further analysis produces a robust result, it is published. If not, back to the file drawer. In the aggregate, the consequences are dire: a lower threshold of evidence for initially significant results than ambiguous ones.20
Our nation is rapidly approaching a point from which there's little chance to avoid a financial collapse. The heart of our problem can be seen as a tragedy of the commons. That's a set of circumstances when something is commonly owned and individuals acting rationally in their own self-interest produce a set of results that's inimical to everyone's long-term interest. Let's look at an example of the tragedy of the commons phenomenon and then apply it to our national problem. Imagine there are 100 cattlemen all having an equal right to graze their herds on 1,000 acres of commonly owned grassland. The rational self-interested response of each cattleman is to have the largest herd that he can afford. Each cattleman pursing similar self-interests will produce results not in any of the cattlemen's long-term interest – overgrazing, soil erosion and destruction of the land's usefulness. Even if they all recognize the dangers, does it pay for any one cattleman to cut the size of his herd? The short answer is no because he would bear the cost of having a smaller herd while the other cattlemen gain at his expense. In the long term, they all lose because the land will be overgrazed and made useless. We can think of the federal budget as a commons to which each of our 535 congressmen and the president have access. Like the cattlemen, each congressman and the president want to get as much out of the federal budget as possible for their constituents. Political success depends upon "bringing home the bacon." Spending is popular, but taxes to finance the spending are not. The tendency is for spending to rise and its financing to be concealed through borrowing and inflation. Does it pay for an individual congressman to say, "This spending is unconstitutional and ruining our nation, and I'll have no part of it; I will refuse a $500 million federal grant to my congressional district"? The answer is no because he would gain little or nothing, plus the federal budget wouldn't be reduced by $500 million. Other congressmen would benefit by having $500 million more for their districts. What about the constituents of a principled congressman? If their congressman refuses unconstitutional spending, it doesn't mean that they pay lower federal income taxes. All that it means is constituents of some other congressmen get the money while the nation spirals toward financial ruin, and they wouldn't be spared from that ruin because their congressman refused to participate in unconstitutional spending. What we're witnessing in Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal and other parts of Europe is a direct result of their massive spending to accommodate the welfare state. A greater number of people are living off government welfare programs than are paying taxes. Government debt in Greece is 160 percent of gross domestic product. The other percentages of GDP are 120 in Italy, 104 in Ireland and 106 in Portugal. As a result of this debt and the improbability of their ever paying it, their credit ratings either have reached or are close to reaching junk bond status. Here's the question for us: Is the U.S. moving in a direction toward or away from the troubled EU nations? It turns out that our national debt, which was 35 percent of GDP during the 1970s, is now 106 percent of GDP, a level not seen since World War II's 122 percent. That debt, plus our more than $100 trillion in unfunded liabilities, has led Standard & Poor's to downgrade our credit rating from AAA to AA+, and the agency is keeping the outlook at "negative" as a result of its having little confidence that Congress will take on the politically sensitive job of tackling the same type of entitlement that has turned Europe into a basket case. I am all too afraid that Benjamin Franklin correctly saw our nation's destiny when he said, "When the people find that they can vote themselves money, that will herald the end of the republic."
Jan. 16, 2006 issue - The U.S. and global economies were able to withstand three body blows in 2005—one of the worst tsunamis on record (which struck at the very end of 2004), one of the worst hurricanes on record and the highest energy prices after Hurricane Katrina—without missing a beat. This resilience was especially remarkable in the case of the United States, which since 2000 has been able to shrug off the biggest stock-market drop since the 1930s, a major terrorist attack, corporate scandals and war. Does this mean that recessions are a relic of the past? No, but recent events do suggest that the global economy's "immune system" is now strong enough to absorb shocks that 25 years ago would probably have triggered a downturn. In fact, over the past two decades, recessions have not disappeared, but have become considerably milder in many parts of the world. What explains this enhanced recession resistance? The answer: a combination of good macroeconomic policies and improved microeconomic flexibility. Since the mid-1980s, central banks worldwide have had great success in taming inflation. This has meant that long-term interest rates are at levels not seen in more than 40 years. A low-inflation and low-interest-rate environment is especially conducive to sustained, robust growth. Moreover, central bankers have avoided some of the policy mistakes of the earlier oil shocks (in the mid-1970s and early 1980s), during which they typically did too much too late, and exacerbated the ensuing recessions. Even more important, in recent years the Fed has been particularly adept at crisis management, aggressively cutting interest rates in response to stock-market crashes, terrorist attacks and weakness in the economy. The benign inflationary picture has also benefited from increasing competitive pressures, both worldwide (thanks to globalization and the rise of Asia as a manufacturing juggernaut) and domestically (thanks to technology and deregulation). Since the late 1970s, the United States, the United Kingdom and a handful of other countries have been especially aggressive in deregulating their financial and industrial sectors. This has greatly increased the flexibility of their economies and reduced their vulnerability to inflationary shocks. Looking ahead, what all this means is that a global or U.S. recession will likely be avoided in 2006, and probably in 2007 as well. Whether the current expansion will be able to break the record set in the 1990s for longevity will depend on the ability of central banks to keep the inflation dragon at bay and to avoid policy mistakes. The prospects look good. Inflation is likely to remain a low-level threat for some time, and Ben Bernanke, the incoming chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, spent much of his academic career studying the past mistakes of the Fed and has vowed not to repeat them. At the same time, no single shock will likely be big enough to derail the expansion. What if oil prices rise to $80 or $90 a barrel? Most estimates suggest that growth would be cut by about 1 percent—not good, but no recession. What if U.S. house prices fall by 5 percent in 2006 (an extreme assumption, given that house prices haven't fallen nationally in any given year during the past four decades)? Economic growth would slow by about 0.5 percent to 1 percent. What about another terrorist attack? Here the scenarios can be pretty scary, but an attack on the order of 9/11 or the Madrid or London bombings would probably have an even smaller impact on overall GDP growth.
The infamous 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill, one of the largest in U.S. history, dumped more than 10 million gallons of crude into Prince William Sound.While the amount of oil and its ultimate fate in such manmade disasters is well known, the effect and size of natural oil seeps on the ocean floor is murkier. A new study finds that the natural petroleum seeps off Santa Barbara, Calif., have leaked out the equivalent of about eight to 80 Exxon Valdez oil spills over hundreds of thousands of years.¶These spills create an oil fallout shadow that contaminates the sediments around the seep, with the oil content decreasing farther from the seep.¶ There is effectively an oil spill every day at Coal Oil Point (COP), the natural seeps off Santa Barbara where 20 to 25 tons of oil have leaked from the seafloor each day for the last several hundred thousand years. The oil from natural seeps and from man-made spills are both formed from the decay of buried fossil remains that are transformed over millions of years through exposure to heat and pressure.
The Deepwater Horizon disaster killed eleven men, and a large amount of oil has been released into the Gulf of Mexico, some of the most important fishing grounds in the U.S. But to claim that it spells the end of a way of life to many Gulf residents is questionable at best. Surely, the Gulf coast economic outlook is not good for the near future, especially with the current recession. But oil spill disasters of equal or greater magnitude have occurred over the past century with little or no long-term consequences.This spill began on April 20. According to the most recent flow-rate estimates of the gusher, it exceeded the Exxon-Valdez spill, which released 259,000 barrels of oil, within the first week. It is interesting to note that Hurricane Katrina caused the release of approximately 167,000 barrels of oil from broken pipelines, storage tanks, and industrial plants, according to the Coast Guard. There was not much environmental damage reported from these leaks, which presumably would have affected the same waters.¶ But these incidents are dwarfed by the 1979 Gulf of Mexico Pemex/Ixtoc I Oil blowout -- until now the largest accidental spill in history. This spill lasted almost ten months, releasing between ten and thirty thousand barrels per day (BPD). In total, it released approximately 3.3 million barrels into the Gulf. Using the current upper end estimate of 60,000 BPD, the Deepwater Horizon spill has now surpassed the Pemex spill, so it can rightfully claim its place as record-holder for accidental spills. But it still is dwarfed by Saddam Hussein's deliberate release of somewhere between 5.7 and 11 million barrels from tankers ten miles off the Kuwaiti coast. While the Pemex spill affected 162 miles of coastline in Texas and Mexico, the long-term environmental consequences were negligible. As one marine biologist put it, "To be honest, considering the magnitude of the spill, we thought the Ixtoc spill was going to have catastrophic effects for decades. ... But within a couple of years, almost everything was close to 100 percent normal again."
"The environment in the Gulf of Mexico is used to coping with petroleum,'' says Tunnell. "The seabed is crisscrossed with petroleum reservoirs, and the equivalent of one to two supertankers full of oil leaks into the Gulf every year. The outcome of that is a huge population of bacteria that feed on oil and live along the shoreline.'' The bacteria as well as other marine life forms along the shoreline got a boost from a strategy employed by both the United States and Mexico: to more or less give up on stopping the oil spill from reaching beaches while concentrating on keeping it out of estuaries and wetlands. "Texas just made a superhuman effort to keep the oil away from rivers, with two or three or four layers of booms to skim it away,'' said Thomas C. Shirley, a biodiversity specialist at Texas A&M Corpus Christi. "We know how to clean up beaches, and it's simple. It's just sand.""But you get up into wetlands, where you're cleaning up shrubs and sea grasses, and it's far more difficult. Everything you're cleaning is alive, and you have to be careful not to do more harm than good.''By keeping oil out of rivers and lagoons, authorities ensured a steady stream of nutrients back into the coastal areas. And as the spill diminished, marine life had a baby boom."A lot of the fishermen around here will tell you that the fish never came back,'' says Vega Morales. "They'll say, 'Oh, in the old days, you could catch fish with your hat, it was so easy.' That's how we are, always talking about the one that got away. But the truth is, after maybe nine months or so, it was back to normal.''Soto, who followed the fish and shrimp population off Mexico closely, found to his surprise that for most species the numbers had returned to normal within two years. "The catastrophic effects that everybody's looking for, those are mostly limited to the first months,'' he says. "Then you start looking in subsequent months, the long- range view, and it all diminishes. The pollution effect becomes more and more difficult to find ...It's like a radio signal, when you're close, it's strong. But when you start moving away, the signal starts to fade.''Even the physical evidence of the spill quickly began disappearing. Tunnell has been visiting Mexico regularly for 30 years, mapping the spilled Ixtoc oil on the country's beaches and coral reefs."In 1979, the islands around Veracruz looked like black doughnuts, there was so much oil clustered around them,'' he remembers. "It was 12 to 15 inches thick in some places. But as I came back over the years, it got harder and hard to find. After five to seven years, it was hard to see the outline, and by 2002, an unsuspecting person would have thought it was a rock ledge ... it was covered with algae and shells and just looked like a normal part of the environment.''Even under water, where the sun can't help the oil break down, nature subverts it, says Mexican marine biodiversity analyst Jorge Brenner. "If you visit the coral reefs in the Gulf of Campeche, the tar has been covered with sea grass, algae and sediment,''
Maybe - though plenty of experienced graduate students could already have a stab. But nature knows that infectious diseases are very hard to get right. Only HIV/Aids has 100 per cent mortality, and takes a long time to achieve it. By definition, lethal diseases kill their host. If they kill too quickly, they aren't passed on; if too slowly, we can detect them and isolate the infected. Any mutant smallpox or other handmade germ would certainly be too deadly or too mild. And even SARS killed fewer people worldwide than die on Britain's roads in a week. As scares go, this one is ideal - overblown and unrealistic.
In fact, based on the past history of nonstate actors conducting attacks using biological weapons, we remain skeptical that a nonstate actor could conduct a biological weapons strike capable of creating as many casualties as a large strike using conventional explosives -- such as the October 2002 Bali bombings that resulted in 202 deaths or the March 2004 train bombings in Madrid that killed 191. We do not disagree with Runge's statements that actors such as al Qaeda have demonstrated an interest in biological weapons. There is ample evidence that al Qaeda has a rudimentary biological weapons capability. However, there is a huge chasm of capability that separates intent and a rudimentary biological weapons program from a biological weapons program that is capable of killing hundreds of thousands of people. There are many misconceptions involving biological weapons. The three most common are that they are easy to obtain, that they are easy to deploy effectively, and that, when used, they always cause massive casualties. While it is certainly true that there are many different types of actors who can easily gain access to rudimentary biological agents, there are far fewer actors who can actually isolate virulent strains of the agents, weaponize them and then effectively employ these agents in a manner that will realistically pose a significant threat of causing mass casualties. While organisms such as anthrax are present in the environment and are not difficult to obtain, more highly virulent strains of these tend to be far more difficult to locate, isolate and replicate. Such efforts require highly skilled individuals and sophisticated laboratory equipment. Even incredibly deadly biological substances such as ricin and botulinum toxin are difficult to use in mass attacks. This difficulty arises when one attempts to take a rudimentary biological substance and then convert it into a weaponized form -- a form that is potent enough to be deadly and yet readily dispersed. Even if this weaponization hurdle can be overcome, once developed, the weaponized agent must then be integrated with a weapons system that can effectively take large quantities of the agent and evenly distribute it in lethal doses to the intended targets. During the past several decades in the era of modern terrorism, biological weapons have been used very infrequently and with very little success. This fact alone serves to highlight the gap between the biological warfare misconceptions and reality. Militant groups desperately want to kill people and are constantly seeking new innovations that will allow them to kill larger numbers of people. Certainly if biological weapons were as easily obtained, as easily weaponized and as effective at producing mass casualties as commonly portrayed, militant groups would have used them far more frequently than they have.
Properly developed and deployed, biological weapons could potentially, if thus far only in theory, kill hundreds of thousands, perhaps even millions, of people. The discussion remains theoretical because biological weapons have scarcely ever been used. For the most destructive results, they need to be dispersed in very low-altitude aerosol clouds. Since aerosols do not appreciably settle, pathogens like anthrax (which is not easy to spread or catch and is not contagious) would probably have to be sprayed near nose level. Moreover, 90 percent of the microorganisms are likely to die during the process of aerosolization, while their effectiveness could be reduced still further by sunlight, smog, humidity, and temperature changes. Explosive methods of dispersion may destroy the organisms, and, except for anthrax spores, long-term storage of lethal organisms in bombs or warheads is difficult: even if refrigerated, most of the organisms have a limited lifetime. Such weapons can take days or weeks to have full effect, during which time they can be countered with medical and civil defense measures. In the summary judgment of two careful analysts, delivering microbes and toxins over a wide area in the form most suitable for inflicting mass casualties-as an aerosol that could be inhaled-requires a delivery system of enormous sophistication, and even then effective dispersal could easily be disrupted by unfavorable environmental and meteorological conditions.
Pity the poor public-health official: in the midst of an epidemic, he must adopt a soothing avuncular tone of near-boredom, a “we’ve seen this, not to worry” sort of yawn to calm people who otherwise seem ready to run screaming into the streets. But on the other hand, in this day of sequestered public-health funding, he has to raise a major ruckus about some other problem that might happen, swearing that the earth may end soon if we don’t wake up now and face the music. The cavalcade of past get-ready-for-the-big-one hits includes drug-resistant TB, avian flu, swine flu, and drug-resistant gonorrhea among others, each introduced with shrill press releases and snapshots of grim faces peering through microscopes.It is no surprise, therefore, to see the CDC roll out the heavy artillery this week by proclaiming the dangers of the latest superbug. This one is ugly for sure, a resistant-to-almost-everything bacteria that preys on the hospitalized patient. Called carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae, or CRE, to denote the class of antibiotics (carbapenems) to which it is resistant, and the group of bacterial organisms—Enterobacteriaceae, bacteria that reside in the gut—to which it belongs, CRE is being seen increasingly in hospitals across the U.S. Unheard of before 2001, CRE now is in 181 (4.6 percent) U.S. acute-care hospitals, affecting hundreds of patients. In August 2012, the NIH Clinical Center had a widely reported outbreak from a CRE that killed six of 18 patients, the mortality rate seen in most series. The CDC and other public-health officials are particularly alarmed by this latest wrinkle because the carbapenem class was the last thoroughly modern group of antibiotics with predictable activity against gut bacteria. With the carbapenem hegemony now wobbling, the next (and last) antibiotic is an oldie from the 1960s, pulled from the market then because of concerns about toxicity, but now being used in many hospitals and ICUs to treat CRE infection. If and when CRE becomes resistant to this old-timer, the cupboard is truly bare. This sort of progressive resistance to antibiotics is standard operating procedure for bacteria exposed to high doses of potent antibiotics over time; resistance can and must occur according to the most basic principle of evolution: survival of the fittest. If a billion bacteria are exposed to an antibiotic and just one bacterium, because of a chance mutation, is resistant to the antibiotic while the other near-billion are not, that single organism will survive while the others will die off. The resistant organism will then have the run of the place with enough nutrition to support the billion now-absented brethren, allowing the resistant clone to take root and get in position to spread. We have been here before of course: methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) played through the hospitals and the headlines (and even the National Football League) last decade, alarming the public and spurring new regulations to contain it as well as the application of money, sort of, to develop new weapons. Perhaps because of all the hubbub, MRSA now seems almost quaint and surely not a headline-screaming scourge: mostly contained, a nuisance, a problem, but being dealt with at the right place by the right people. In other words, it has assumed its proper proportion in the world of threats and dangers. The same likely will happen with CRE. More cases will occur, hospitals will make the necessary adjustments suggested by the CDC, specialists will learn their way around the diseases, and eventually the threat and the excitement around it will flatten out. And then the next red-hot development on some other front will emerge rendering the acronym to oblivion. The problem though is this: the mix of steady CDC concern about a real issue that requires attention, a world with infinite capacity for both news and “news,” and a perverse public enjoyment of being frightened has succeeded in little other than scaring the crap out of people who might need medical care. Indeed, hospitals seem to occupy the same imagined place as the Overlook Hotel, the cavernous inn Jack Nicholson prowled in The Shining—the last place on earth a sane person would go. Health care in general and hospitals specifically are viewed these days by just about everyone as a veritable killing field, the place where the two inevitabilities—death and taxes—meet daily as people are fleeced then killed. Such is not the case. Honest. Yes, I know I am tainted goods because of my conflict of interest: I work in a hospital and I believe in medical care. But please remember that people in ICUs, where CRE and so many other deadly infections lurk, are not denizens of executive suites. They are already quite ill, usually with multiorgan failure from the heart attack or stroke or high-speed automobile crash that brought them to emergency medical care. They then are exposed to the high-tech ballet of life-sustaining futuristic machines, venous and urinary catheters, potent and often toxic medications, and all the rest. They also are exposed to the bacteria in their own intestines, mouth, and skin, as well those in the environment, much less the imperfectly cleaned hands of hospital staff. Horrible, heartbreaking, and fully preventable things happen in ICUs, but so too are many lives saved. The demonization of health care has occurred simultaneously with our deepening fascination of the promise of tomorrow, an almost religious belief that medicine is just inches away from conquering just about everything. These two fantastic extremes pervert reality with equal force and fully obscure the truth about medical care in 2013: we are neither in a hell of ineptitude and willful neglect nor just inches from the next great golden age of health. And though hospitals are complicated, difficult places to spend time, the view that, to preserve health, it is safer to avoid care than to seek it is a dangerous and troubling delusion.
A recent series of deadly methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus infections — the “super bug” — have driven the nation into a panic, but some health officials are saying this widespread fear is a severe overreaction. “It’s not a threat to the average person. It can cause minor to serious cases only under specific circumstances,” said Claire Pospisil, spokesperson for the New York State Department of Health. This specific staph-infection causing bacteria strain, identified over 40 years ago, typically occurs in healthcare settings, but recent media coverage has emphasized dangers posed to the general population from community-associated MRSA which is spread by poor hygiene and close personal contact. Stories of high school and college students becoming severely ill, in some cases even dying, from MRSA have forced many people to think seriously about the potential dangers posed by the bacteria and take precautions against it. However, according to Sharon Dittman, associate director of community relations at Gannett, many of the concerns erupting from this coverage and drastic prevention measures being taken — closing schools, canceling sports events, disinfecting entire facilities top to bottom — are out of proportion with the real problem. “This has really scared people into making decisions that may or may not be called for,” she said. While she encouraged people to take precautions against the bacteria, like washing hands and not sharing personal items such as razors andtowels, Dittman said the potential risk for developing a serious MRSA infection is quite low, even for collegestudents living in close-quarters conditions. Usually present as a mild skin condition, MRSA infections appear as reddened skin rashes that may develop into boils or pimples, causing fevers and pain. Pospisil said that at this stage, the infection is not serious as long as it is taken care of. She said, “I think for community-associated MRSA cases, the important thing for people to know is if they have a skin infection, they should have a doctor look at it. The sooner they identify it, the better.” Although the MRSA strain is resistant to methicillin, an antibiotic in the same family as penicillin, infection is treatable. According to Christine Pearson, spokesperson for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, these cases can easily be taken care of and are no cause for alarm. “Most MRSA skin infections are mild and don’t cause death,” she said. Blaming a misinterpretation of a recent CDC report that found 19,000 people died in 2005 from the antibiotic-resistant bacteria, Pearson said the nation has become overly concerned with MRSA. The study indicated that invasive MRSA cases are a serious problem in hospitals and healthcare clinics, but did not indicate heightened risks for most of the general population. “There are two different things here,” she said. According to the CDC, invasive MRSA cases often cause serious complications by infecting bloodstreams and spreading throughout the body, but the more common MRSA skin infections usually do not become this serious. Different people are susceptible to different stages of MRSA infection. Healthy individuals with infections can typically isolate the problem and easily treat it. On the other hand, people with weak immune systems run a higher risk of developing a case of the potentially deadly invasive MRSA. While health officials across the country are making attempts to calm down frantic parents and students, many welcome the opportunity to educate people on how to avoid MRSA infections, issuing guidelines and fact sheets about the bacteria. Pearson said, “It never hurts to remind people about how to stay safe.” Finding a positive side to the recent nationwide media attention, Dittman said that at least those who do run the risk of developing a life-threatening infection from MRSA will now be aware of the condition. Crediting the CDC report, she said she thinks people will be more likely to understand just how deadly MRSA can be under certain conditions and take the necessary precautions.
After myriad clinical studies on how to prevent disease, there are clear guidelines on what people generally need to do and eat to have a shot a longevity. Yet, from time to time, recommendations fall to the wayside as new discoveries result in “course corrections” on the path to long life and health. Gobbling multivitamins, for example, is now out and working out in the morning following by a day of office work is out. Prof. David Agus, a prominent 48-yearold oncologist at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles and author of the bestselling book The End of Illness, has aimed beyond increasing the numbers of nonagenarians around the world. He dispenses medical advice aimed at helping people to live robustly until their last breath – like Moses the prophet was gathered unto his fathers without first suffering from any debilitating illness. Originally published in 2011 in English by the Free Press Division of Simon and Schuster, the book has just been translated into Hebrew by Matar. (One hopes that the Hebrew edition will expunge the original endorsement that appears on the English version from Lance Armstrong, the disgraced “seven-time Tour de France winner.”) Agus, who comes from a prominent Jewish family – his grandfather, Rabbi Jacob Agus, was a theologian and the author of books on Jewish history and philosophy – is coming to Jerusalem later this month. The author was invited to attend the Presidential Conference by President Shimon Peres – who is well known for his own healthy longevity. Agus graduated from Princeton University and received his medical degree from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine. He then did his residency at Baltimore’s Johns Hopkins Hospital and completed his oncology fellowship training at New York’s famed Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, where he also headed the tumor biology lab. His dealings with cancer led to his exploration of genetic influences and his co-founding of two California companies – Navigenics, a personal genetic testing company, and Applied Proteomics, which searches the blood for biomarkers that provide early warning or prevention of disease. Agus us currently a professor of medicine and engineering at the University of Southern California’s Keck School of Medicine. The 335-pageThe End of Illness, his first book, was on The New York Times bestseller list. At the outset, Agus notes that colleagues were surprised he went to treating and researching cancer because, with exceptions, “there’s little hope for survival in many cases, and the cure is as evasive today as it ever was. I’m infuriated by the statistics, disappointed in the progress that the medical profession has made and exasperated by the backward thinking that science continues to espouse, which no doubt cripples our hunt for the magic bullet.” He continues: “The war on cancer might be ugly and destructive on many levels. But on a positive note there are many lessons learned in the experience of this war that can then be used to prevent future wars and maximize peace. After all, the goal should be to avoid ever having to go to war rather than to win a war. And in the health realm, this is especially true.” HIS IDEAL end of life is “to live robustly to a ripe old age of 100 or more. Then, as if your master switch clicked off, your body just goes kaput. You die peacefully in your sleep after your last dance that evening. You don’t die of any particular illness, and you haven’t gradually been wasting away under the spell of some awful, enfeebling disease that began years or decades earlier.” The “end of illness,” he writes, “is closer than you might think.”
Regarding the recent article "Attack of the Superbugs" (Scott Gottlieb, op-ed, Oct. 30), it is correct to point out that the Food and Drug Administration is largely to blame for the lack of new antibiotics against superbugs such as methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). But Dr. Gottlieb incorrectly diminishes the effectiveness of preventive measures. Numerous studies show that screening and cleaning can reduce MRSA infections in hospitals by as much as 90%, even in the absence of new drugs. Screening means identifying incoming patients carrying the germ, and then taking precautions to prevent it from spreading to other patients. Recent studies at Rush Medical College in Chicago and Boston University in Massachusetts show that training cleaners not to overlook surfaces and to allow detergents to remain on surfaces for at least three minutes, rather than just giving a quick spray and wipe, can curb the spread of germs from patient to patient. Can hospitals afford screening and cleaning? They cannot afford not to do it. The evidence is compelling that these steps actually make hospitals more profitable, and require almost no capital outlay. While waiting for the miracle cures, hospitals should implement MRSA screening and thorough cleaning. This two step strategy will save patients lives immediately, no matter how the bacteria morph. Betsy McCaughey, Ph.D. Chairman, Committee to Reduce Infection Deaths New York Dr. Gottlieb's op-ed carries an important message for all Americans. I agree with everything in his article, but he does not present the full extent of the problem nor does he address new and hopeful, innovative diagnostic and therapeutic developments. He discusses antibiotic resistance in well-published "superbugs" such as MRSA, but antibiotic resistance is also a growing threat in such common problems as urinary tract infection in nursing homes. Approximately 85 such infections per 100 long-term care beds occur each year. These organisms show increasing resistance to even potent antibiotics. Dr. Gottlieb also does not mention the dangers of biofilm and nosacomial (hospital acquired) infections. Biofilm is a slime like matrix produced by micro-organisms as a defense mechanism against their environment. Biofilm is particularly dangerous to hospital patients whose first line defense against infection (their skin) has been breached by injury, surgery (particularly involving implants) and various types of catheters. This is the main cause of nosacomial infection, which involves two million patients and 90,000 deaths per year in the U.S. Antibiotics are ineffective in preventing and treating biofilm infections. The good news is that help may be on the way. A group that includes UCLA, the Veterans Administration of Greater Los Angeles and GeneFluidics Inc. of Santa Monica, Calif., and which is funded by the National Institutes of Health, published a promising new technique in the Journal of Clinical Microbiology last year. The diagnostic technique can rapidly (under 30 minutes) identify uropathogens in clinical urine by using an electrochemical DNA biosensor. The biosensor turns the genetic information of the bacteria into an electrical signal. This is analogous to a telephone, which turns voice into an electrical signal. Other new methods for rapidly testing antibiotic susceptibility are also currently being evaluated. Dr. Gottlieb outlines the limitations of current antibiotics and problems of bringing new antibiotics to the market. Antibiotics are substances produced or derived from one micro-organism which destroys or inhibits the growth of other micro-organisms. New antibiotics will be developed. However progress in antimicrobials will also be made. A new group of hopeful antimicrobial compounds called Aganocides (developed by Nova Bay Pharmaceuticals) are based on small molecules generated by our own white cells that defend against invading pathogens. In the body these compounds are produced "on demand" and are transient. Important safety features include long shelf life, stability and very high therapeutic index (kills pathogens at concentrations significantly lower than concentration where it begins to harm human cells). Aganocides also unlikely to be rejected by the immune system and are unlikely to provoke bacterial resistance. They are also likely to kill bacteria in minutes, kill most, if not all species of bacteria, and kill certain viruses, yeast and fungi. And Aganocides may even kill resistant bacteria and destroy bacteria protected by biofilm. Current evidence indicates that a normal adult human has more bacteria in his body than his own DNA. In optimal condition, bacteria are divided every 20 to 30 minutes producing billions of pathogens in a single day. These two facts alone guarantee that bacteria will always present problems for medical science. But new diagnostic and therapeutic developments will continue to allow us to be masters of our bodies.
Less than a decade ago, most observers spoke not of America’s decline but of its enduring primacy. In 2002, the historian Paul Kennedy, who in the late 1980s had written a much-discussed book on “the rise and fall of the great powers,” America included, declared that never in history had there been such a great “disparity of power” as between the United States and the rest of the world. Ikenberry agreed that “no other great power” had held “such formidable advantages in military, economic, technological, cultural, or political capabilities.... The preeminence of American power” was “unprecedented.” In 2004, the pundit Fareed Zakaria described the United States as enjoying a “comprehensive uni-polarity” unlike anything seen since Rome. But a mere four years later Zakaria was writing about the “post-American world” and “the rise of the rest,” and Kennedy was discoursing again upon the inevitability of American decline. Did the fundamentals of America’s relative power shift so dramatically in just a few short years? The answer is no. Let’s start with the basic indicators. In economic terms, and even despite the current years of recession and slow growth, America’s position in the world has not changed. Its share of the world’s GDP has held remarkably steady, not only over the past decade but over the past four decades. In 1969, the United States produced roughly a quarter of the world’s economic output. Today it still produces roughly a quarter, and it remains not only the largest but also the richest economy in the world. People are rightly mesmerized by the rise of China, India, and other Asian nations whose share of the global economy has been climbing steadily, but this has so far come almost entirely at the expense of Europe and Japan, which have had a declining share of the global economy. Optimists about China’s development predict that it will overtake the United States as the largest economy in the world sometime in the next two decades. This could mean that the United States will face an increasing challenge to its economic position in the future. But the sheer size of an economy is not by itself a good measure of overall power within the international system. If it were, then early nineteenth-century China, with what was then the world’s largest economy, would have been the predominant power instead of the prostrate victim of smaller European nations. Even if China does reach this pinnacle again—and Chinese leaders face significant obstacles to sustaining the country’s growth indefinitely—it will still remain far behind both the United States and Europe in terms of per capita GDP. Military capacity matters, too, as early nineteenth-century China learned and Chinese leaders know today. As Yan Xuetong recently noted, “military strength underpins hegemony.” Here the United States remains unmatched. It is far and away the most powerful nation the world has ever known, and there has been no decline in America’s relative military capacity—at least not yet. Americans currently spend less than $600 billion a year on defense, more than the rest of the other great powers combined. (This figure does not include the deployment in Iraq, which is ending, or the combat forces in Afghanistan, which are likely to diminish steadily over the next couple of years.) They do so, moreover, while consuming a little less than 4 percent of GDP annually—a higher percentage than the other great powers, but in historical terms lower than the 10 percent of GDP that the United States spent on defense in the mid-1950s and the 7 percent it spent in the late 1980s. The superior expenditures underestimate America’s actual superiority in military capability. American land and air forces are equipped with the most advanced weaponry, and are the most experienced in actual combat. They would defeat any competitor in a head-to-head battle. American naval power remains predominant in every region of the world. By these military and economic measures, at least, the United States today is not remotely like Britain circa 1900, when that empire’s relative decline began to become apparent. It is more like Britain circa 1870, when the empire was at the height of its power. It is possible to imagine a time when this might no longer be the case, but that moment has not yet arrived.
The striking thing about the present international situation is the degree to which America remains what Bill Clinton once called "the indispensable nation." Despite global opinion polls registering broad hostility to George W. Bush's United States, the behavior of governments and political leaders suggests America's position in the world is not all that different from what it was before Sept. 11 and the Iraq war. The much-anticipated global effort to balance against American hegemony -- which the realists have been anticipating for more than 15 years now -- has simply not occurred. On the contrary, in Europe the idea has all but vanished. European Union defense budgets continue their steady decline, and even the project of creating a common foreign and defense policy has slowed if not stalled. Both trends are primarily the result of internal European politics. But if they really feared American power, Europeans would be taking more urgent steps to strengthen the European Union's hand to check it. Nor are Europeans refusing to cooperate, even with an administration they allegedly despise. Western Europe will not be a strategic partner as it was during the Cold War, because Western Europeans no longer feel threatened and therefore do not seek American protection. Nevertheless, the current trend is toward closer cooperation. Germany's new government, while still dissenting from U.S. policy in Iraq, is working hard and ostentatiously to improve relations. It is bending over backward to show support for the mission in Afghanistan, most notably by continuing to supply a small but, in German terms, meaningful number of troops. It even trumpets its willingness to train Iraqi soldiers. Chancellor Angela Merkel promises to work closely with Washington on the question of the China arms embargo, indicating agreement with the American view that China is a potential strategic concern. For Eastern and Central Europe, the growing threat is Russia, not America, and the big question remains what it was in the 1990s: Who will be invited to join NATO? In East Asia, meanwhile, U.S. relations with Japan grow ever closer as the Japanese become increasingly concerned about China and a nuclear-armed North Korea. China's (and Malaysia's) attempt to exclude Australia from a prominent regional role at the recent East Asian summit has reinforced Sydney's desire for closer ties. Only in South Korea does hostility to the United States remain high. This is mostly the product of the new democracy's understandable historical resentments and desire for greater independence. But even so, when I attended a conference in Seoul recently, the question posed to my panel by the South Korean organizers was: "How will the United States solve the problem of North Korea's nuclear weapons?" The truth is, America retains enormous advantages in the international arena. Its liberal, democratic ideology remains appealing in a world that is more democratic than ever. Its potent economy remains the driving wheel of the international economy. Compared with these powerful forces, the unpopularity of recent actions will prove ephemeral, just as it did after the nadir of American Cold War popularity in the late 1960s and early 1970s. There are also structural reasons why American indispensability can survive even the unpopularity of recent years. The political scientist William Wohlforth argued a decade ago that the American unipolar era is durable not because of any love for the United States but because of the basic structure of the international system. The problem for any nation attempting to balance American power, even in that power's own region, is that long before it becomes strong enough to balance the United States, it may frighten its neighbors into balancing against it. Europe would be the exception to this rule were it increasing its power, but it is not. Both Russia and China face this problem as they attempt to exert greater influence even in their traditional spheres of influence. It remains the case, too, that in many crises and potential crises around the world, local actors and traditional allies still look primarily to Washington for solutions, not to Beijing, Moscow or even Brussels. The United States is the key player in the Taiwan Strait. It would be the chief intermediary between India and Pakistan in any crisis. As for Iran, everyone on both sides of the Atlantic knows that, for all the efforts of British, French and German negotiators, any diplomatic or military resolution will ultimately depend on Washington. Even in the Middle East, where hostility to the United States is highest, American influence remains remarkably high. Most still regard the United States as the indispensable player in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The Bush administration's push for democracy, though erratic and inconsistent, has unmistakably affected the course of events in Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Lebanon -- never mind Iraq. Contrary to predictions at the time of the Iraq war, Arab hostility has not made it impossible for both leaders and their political opponents to cooperate with the United States. This does not mean the United States has not suffered a relative decline in that intangible but important commodity: legitimacy. A combination of shifting geopolitical realities, difficult circumstances and some inept policy has certainly damaged America's standing in the world. Yet, despite everything, the American position in the world has not deteriorated as much as people think. America still "stands alone as the world's indispensable nation," as Clinton so humbly put it in 1997. It can resume an effective leadership role in the world in fairly short order, even during the present administration and certainly after the 2008 election, regardless of which party wins. That is a good thing, because given the growing dangers in the world, the intelligent and effective exercise of America's benevolent global hegemony is as important as ever.
The intellectual battle over the future of American hegemony has been joined. Andrew Bacevich argues that the American Century has ended and that further American pretentions to hegemony will lead to disaster. Michael Cohen argues that the United States suffers from critical domestic problems that undermine long-term U.S. capability. On the other side of the debate, Dan Drezner, Robert Kagan and others (.pdf) argue that U.S. military and economic advantage are likely to persist over the foreseeable future. How might we know that the American Century has actually ended? Shifts in hegemony rarely come with a herald; even when the U.S. was at its most dominant in 1945, the shape of the future was hardly clear. Indeed, the United States surpassed the United Kingdom in economic power -- and in latent military power -- around the turn of the 20th century, yet no one claims that the American Century began in 1900, or that British hegemony ended when the GDP numbers turned south. Indeed, while the United States surely played a pre-eminent role in global politics after 1945, the existence of the Soviet Union put a wide swath of the globe off limits to direct U.S. influence. In military terms, we are still many years from a replay of the kind of global military and ideological competition that characterized the Cold War, even if we accept worst-case assumptions about China’s growth and belligerence. The rise of China and India seems inevitable, and it is quite likely that both will exceed the total GDP of the United States before the end of the 21st century. However, the rise of Japan and Europe relative to the U.S. seemed inevitable 25 years ago. Moreover, while the rise of China and India might introduce uncertainty, economic power does not translate automatically into military and political influence. Recall again that the United States possessed the world’s largest economy for some 40 years before “its” century is supposed to have begun. The U.S. also benefitted from advantages that neither China nor India currently enjoy, such as a relatively high per capita GDP and a secure geographic position. Even if the United States holds only a plurality of global military and economic power, it still may remain the most influential state in the world. Russia, China, Japan and India will have more to fear from one another than from the United States, allowing the U.S. to play a critical balancing role. Moreover, the United States has weathered the financial crisis better than some, particularly the European Union. And while China and India have maintained robust growth during the past five years, social, economic and political cracks may be emerging. Intentions matter, too. The United States could have pursued, if not military hegemony, then at least military primacy in 1918. At the time, its economic power and industrial production could have overwhelmed -- albeit with some difficulty -- the combined capacity of both Japan and the United Kingdom. The 1922 Washington Naval Treaty effectively allowed Japan and the U.K. to avoid a ruinous arms race with the United States, a race that the U.S. could have run and won but chose not to. As long as the United States continues to pursue the tasks associated with hegemony -- such as maintenance of the reserve currency, defense of global maritime trade and the underwriting of major international institutions -- some sort of American Century will persist. What can the U.S. do to extend the American Century? The most important step for the U.S. to take is to gain the acquiescence, grudging or not, of most of the rest of the major international players in modern global society. Accommodating Indian, Chinese or even Russian concerns within the U.S.-managed global framework demonstrates the utility and flexibility of that system, and reinforces the sense that the United States plays a unique role. The strength and resilience of a system -- and when we speak of U.S. hegemony, we really mean the system of norms and institutions that the United States has established -- depends more on its ability to co-opt competitors than to crush or isolate them. This hardly means that the United States must concede to every demand from every competitor, but we shouldn’t think of the need for careful diplomacy as weakness; rather, the ability to handle problems diplomatically reflects strength. What are the dangers? Hegemony has never meant the ability to achieve any outcome the United States wants, whenever it wants. Indeed, hegemony may mean the luxury to make dreadful mistakes without suffering dreadful consequences. However, as the gap between the United States and other great powers declines, the margin for error narrows. The most dangerous steps for the United States to take would involve projects that threaten fiscal capacity while also undercutting the U.S.-sponsored system of global management. The invasion of Iraq, for example, is not an undertaking that the United States would want to repeat in the future. It undermined global confidence in both the international system of governance and the decision-making capacity of the United States government, while damaging the fiscal health of the United States. Ironically, advocates of the war believed that it would demonstrate not only American power, but also reinforce confidence in American leadership. For better or worse, the U.S. has imparted the character of the major formal and informal institutions that have managed international life for the past 70 years. The shift from U.S. hegemony to multipolarity -- or to unipolarity around another nation -- will change the nature of those institutions, likely leading to a significant degree of upheaval and uncertainty. The great danger is that the United States will, in an effort to prolong and maintain its hegemony, undertake policies that undermine the foundations of American’s place in the world. It is not comforting that those who talk loudest of U.S. exceptionalism and a new American Century consistently recommend policies that misunderstand the relationship between U.S. power and the modern international system. Nothing about the future is guaranteed; wise policies can revise and extend a globally acceptable “American Century,” while foolish policies can cut it short.
A world without honeybees would also mean a world without fruits, vegetables, nuts, and seeds. Nearly one-third of the world's crops are dependent on honeybees for pollination, but over the last decade the black-and-yellow insects have been dying at unprecedented rates both in the United States and abroad. [Jump straight to the photos] Pesticides, disease, parasites, poor weather, and the stress of being trucked from orchard-to-orchard to pollinate different crops all play a role in the decline of managed honeybee populations. A lack of bees threatens farmers who depend on these nectar- and pollen-eating animals for their pollination services. We have few planned defenses against a honeybee disaster. The Farm Bill, passed on June 10, 2013, allocates less than $2 million a year in emergency assistance to honeybees. "The bottom line is, if something is not done to improve honeybee health, then most of the interesting food we eat is going to be unavailable," warns Carlen Jupe, secretary and treasurer for the California State Beekeepers Association. Honeybees as a species are not in danger of extinction, but their ability to support the industry of commercial pollination, and by extension, a large portion of our food supply, is in serious danger. Whole Foods recently imagined what our grocery store would like in a world without bees by removing more than half of the market's produce. Here, we also take a purely hypothetical look at how the human diet and lifestyle would change if honeybees and other bee pollinators disappeared from our planet one day. This is the worst case scenario — it's possible that human ingenuity and alternate pollinators can mitigate some of these outcomes, but not necessarily all of them.
In an op-ed article printed in the Denver Post May 8, editorial columnist Vince Carroll endorsed the view of population control advocate Lester Brown that the U.S. corn ethanol program is threatening the world’s poor with starvation. This endorsement is especially remarkable in view of the fact that, as the otherwise generally astute Mr. Carroll has correctly noted many times in the past, all of Lester Brown’s many previous limited-resources doomsday predictions have proven wildly incorrect. In fact, Lester Brown is wrong about the alleged famine-inducing potential of the ethanol program for exactly the same reason he has been repeatedly wrong about the alleged famine-inducing potential of population growth. There is not a fixed amount of grain in the world. Farmers produce in response to demand. The more customers, the more grain. Not only that, but the larger the potential market, the greater the motivation for investment in improved techniques. This is why, despite the fact that the world population has indeed doubled since Lester Brown, Paul Ehrlich, and the other population control zealots first published their manifestos during the 1960s, people worldwide are eating much better today than they were then. In the case of America’s corn growing industry, the beneficial effect of a growing market has been especially pronounced, with corn yields per acre in 2010 (165 bushels per acre) being 37 percent higher than they were in 2002 (120 bushels per acres) and more than four times as great as they were in 1960 (40 bushels per acre.) Not only that, but in part because of the impetus of the expanded ethanol program, another doubling of yield is now in sight, as the best farms have pushed yields above 300 bushels per acre. As a result, in 2010, the state of Iowa alone produced more corn than the entire United States did in 1947. Of our entire corn crop, only 2 percent is actually eaten by Americans as corn, or 12 percent if one includes products like corn chips and corn syrup. These advances in productivity do not only benefit the United States. America’s farmers are the vanguard for their counterparts worldwide. New seed strains and other techniques first demonstrated on our most advanced farms, subsequently spread to average farms, and then go global, thereby raising crop yields everywhere.
While there are many reasons to fear global warming, the risk that such dangers could cause violent conflict ranks extremely low on the list because it is highly unlikely to materialize. Despite decades of warnings about water wars, what is striking is that water wars don't happen-usually because countries that share water resources have a lot more at stake and armed conflict rarely fixes the problem. Some analysts have pointed to conflicts over resources, including water and valuable land, as a cause in the Rwandan genocide, for example. Recently, the UN secretary-general suggested that climate change was already exacerbating the conflicts in Sudan. But none of these supposed causal chains stay linked under close scrutiny-the conflicts over resources are usually symptomatic of deeper failures in governance and other primal forces for conflicts, such as ethnic tensions, income inequalities and other unsettled grievances. Climate is just one of many factors that contribute to tension. The same is true for scenarios of climate refugees, where the moniker "climate" conveniently obscures the deeper causal forces.
If resource wars are actually rare-and when they do exist, they are part of a complex of causal factors-then much of the conventional wisdom about resource policies needs fresh scrutiny. A full-blown new strategy is beyond this modest essay, but here in the United States, at least three lines of new thinking are needed. First, the United States needs to think differently about the demands that countries with exploding growth are making on the world's resources. It must keep their rise in perspective, as their need for resources is still, on a per capita basis, much smaller than typical Western appetites. And what matters most is that the United States must focus on how to accommodate these countries' peaceful rise and their inevitable need for resources. Applied to China, this means getting the Chinese government to view efficient markets as the best way to obtain resources-not only because such an approach leads to correct pricing (which encourages energy efficiency as resources become more dear), but also because it transforms all essential resources into commodities, which makes their particular physical location less important than the overall functioning of the commodity market. All that will, in turn, make resource wars even less likely because it will create common interests among all the countries with the greatest demand for resources. It will transform the resource problem from a zero-sum struggle to the common task of managing markets. Most policymakers agree with such general statements, but the actual practice of U.S. policy has largely undercut this goal. Saber-rattling about CNOOC'S attempt to buy Unocal-along with similar fear-mongering around foreign control of ports and new rules that seem designed to trigger reviews by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States when foreigners try to buy American-owned assets-sends the signal that going out will also be the American approach, rather than letting markets function freely. Likewise, one of the most important actions in the oil market is to engage China and other emerging countries fully in the International Energy Agency-which is the world's only institution for managing the oil commodity markets in times of crisis-yet despite wide bipartisan consensus on that goal, nearly nothing is ever done to execute such a policy. Getting China to source commodities through markets rather than mercantilism will be relatively easy because Chinese policymakers, as well as the leadership of state enterprises that invest in natural resource projects, already increasingly think that way. The sweep of history points against classic resource wars. Whereas colonialism created long, oppressive and often war-prone supply chains for resources such as oil and rubber, most resources today are fungible commodities. That means it is almost always cheaper and more reliable to buy them in markets.
These claims generally boil down to an argument about resource scarcity. Desertification, sea-level rise, more-frequent severe weather events, an increased geographical range of tropical disease, and shortages of freshwater will lead to violence over scarce necessities. Friction between haves and have-nots will increase, and governments will be hard-pressed to provide even the most basic services. In some scenarios, mass migration will ensue, whether due to desertification, natural disasters, and rising sea levels, or as a consequence of resource wars. Environmental refugees will in turn spark political violence in receiving areas, and countries in the global North will erect ever higher barriers to keep culturally unwelcome and hungry foreigners out. The number of failed states, meanwhile, will increase as governments collapse in the face of resource wars and weakened state capabilities, and transnational terrorists and criminal networks will move in. International wars over depleted water and energy supplies will also intensify. The basic need for survival will supplant nationalism, religion, or ideology as the fundamental root of conflict. Dire scenarios like these may sound convincing, but they are misleading. Even worse, they are irresponsible, for they shift liability for wars and human rights abuses away from oppressive, corrupt governments. Additionally, focusing on climate change as a security threat that requires a military response diverts attention away from prudent adaptation mechanisms and new technologies that can prevent the worst catastrophes. First, aside from a few anecdotes, there is little systematic empirical evidence that resource scarcity and changing environmental conditions lead to conflict. In fact, several studies have shown that an abundance of natural resources is more likely to contribute to conflict. Moreover, even as the planet has warmed, the number of civil wars and insurgencies has decreased dramatically. Data collected by researchers at Uppsala University and the International Peace Research Institute, Oslo shows a steep decline in the number of armed conflicts around the world. Between 1989 and 2002, some 100 armed conflicts came to an end, including the wars in Mozambique, Nicaragua, and Cambodia. If global warming causes conflict, we should not be witnessing this downward trend. Furthermore, if famine and drought led to the crisis in Darfur, why have scores of environmental catastrophes failed to set off armed conflict elsewhere? For instance, the U.N. World Food Programme warns that 5 million people in Malawi have been experiencing chronic food shortages for several years. But famine-wracked Malawi has yet to experience a major civil war. Similarly, the Asian tsunami in 2004 killed hundreds of thousands of people, generated millions of environmental refugees, and led to severe shortages of shelter, food, clean water, and electricity. Yet the tsunami, one of the most extreme catastrophes in recent history, did not lead to an outbreak of resource wars. Clearly then, there is much more to armed conflict than resource scarcity and natural disasters.
Rising energy prices and mounting concerns about environmental depletion have animated fears that the world may be headed for a spate of "resource wars"-hot conflicts triggered by a struggle to grab valuable resources. Such fears come in many stripes, but the threat industry has sounded the alarm bells especially loudly in three areas. First is the rise of China, which is poorly endowed with many of the resources it needs-such as oil, gas, timber and most minerals-and has already "gone out" to the world with the goal of securing what it wants. Violent conflicts may follow as the country shunts others aside. A second potential path down the road to resource wars starts with all the money now flowing into poorly governed but resource-rich countries. Money can fund civil wars and other hostilities, even leaking into the hands of terrorists. And third is global climate change, which could multiply stresses on natural resources and trigger water wars, catalyze the spread of disease or bring about mass migrations. Most of this is bunk, and nearly all of it has focused on the wrong lessons for policy. Classic resource wars are good material for Hollywood screenwriters. They rarely occur in the real world. To be sure, resource money can magnify and prolong some conflicts, but the root causes of those hostilities usually lie elsewhere. Fixing them requires focusing on the underlying institutions that govern how resources are used and largely determine whether stress explodes into violence. When conflicts do arise, the weak link isn't a dearth in resources but a dearth in governance.
At the World Trade Organisation's Doha Round in 2001, many developing nations – including Brazil, China and India – opposed agricultural subsidies in the US and EU. They argued the high subsidies were artificially driving down global crop prices, unfairly undermining small farmers and maintaining poverty in many developing countries. What a difference 12 years makes. In that time, developing countries have grown their own agricultural subsidies rapidly. And those in BRIIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India, Indonesia and China) have increased the fastest. China's agricultural subsidies, estimated at $160bn (£103bn) in 2012, now dwarf those in the US ($19bn) and EU ($67bn) combined. Brazil's agricultural subsidies have doubled in just three years, and now total about $10bn, according to a recent government report. And in India, price supports for wheat and rice grew by 72% and 75%, respectively, between 2005-06 and 2010-11, significantly exceeding those in the US. If done well, these rapidly developing countries' agricultural investments could support innovation and help build a stronger middle class, feed the hungry, produce surpluses for export and pull millions of the rural poor out of poverty and into better lifestyles. But such spending must be very targeted and short term. For example, a subsidy could be used to support the adoption of technologies or practices that are not common with producers. But, once proven to be cost effective, the subsidies should be removed. In general, subsidies should be employed to change behaviour and solve specific problems rather than to serve as a long-term crutch for producers. If not, it will stifle innovation and make producers both less competitive and more dependent on government. On our finite planet, where natural resources are increasingly hard to come by, it's important for producers to focus on doing more with less. Subsidies tend to reduce incentives for producers to boost efficiency and shift their focus from crops to farming subsidies. As a result, many end up doing less with more. For example, India subsidises the cost of energy to pump water for agriculture, which encourages producers to pump more water than they need. This has made Indian producers among the world's least efficient water users. Given that food and water are in short supply, a more effective way to run the system would be to support those who produce more food with less water. Global subsidies may also lead producers to overuse fertilisers or pesticides, which can result in soil degradation, groundwater depletion and other negative environmental impacts. In addition, agricultural subsidies and price supports can also distort global commodity markets, affecting the global economy, and affect national security, food security and poverty. As per-capita incomes and consumption increase globally, the last thing we need are market distortions that send producers unclear signals about food prices and global demand. Unless handled carefully, agricultural subsidies could undermine efforts to promote efficiency and more sustainable agriculture. And that, in turn, could make many people reluctant to invest in sustainability at all. What we need, now more than ever, are producers who invest in efficiency, innovation and sustainability. Unfortunately, though unsurprisingly, an increasing number of producers defend subsidies and seek to maintain or even increase them. To change this situation, governments first need to wake up to the long-term implications of agricultural subsidies. It is advisable for them to be more wary. After all, many developing countries still struggle to provide basic services such as clean air and water, education, public services, infrastructure and healthcare for ageing populations. Within the context of these competing needs, we need to ensure that any agricultural subsidies increase productivity, efficiency and global competitiveness. Otherwise, it will be increasingly difficult to justify supporting one segment of the population when so many other priorities remain unfunded. We've come a long way since the Doha launch, in terms of global economic growth and the increase in global per-capita GDP. Many BRIIC and developing countries have led the way. Now we need to take a hard look to assess whether agricultural subsidies are the best way to address food security and other basic human needs. Global economic progress requires a recalibration of how we approach today's challenges. Agricultural subsidies can be a blunt instrument that can impede progress and slow economic growth if they're wielded without precision and a specific cut-off date. We'll only succeed in protecting our planet – and our food security – if we change how we think about subsidies and how we use them. 
A new US Department of Agriculture report looking only at the threat of climate change implies that industrial agriculture will be on its knees in 25 years. “We’re going to end up in a situation where we have a multitude of things happening that are going to negatively impact crop production,” said Jerry Hatfield, lead author of the study. “In fact, we saw this in 2012 with the drought.” Ever the cheerleader for industrial agriculture, the USDA insists that corporate farmers will be fine for a couple dozen years as long as they increase irrigation, use genetically modified, drought-resistant seeds — and move. After that time frame, however, the USDA report — the third annual Climate Assessment Report, just released in draft form for public review — throws up its hands and admits that escalating temperatures will stunt crops, reduce yields, stimulate weeds and insects, overheat food animals, foster disease and — worst of all — reduce profitability. In other words, it will be the end of the world as they know it. Okay, that’s snide. The report states flatly that within 25 years the cumulative effects of global warming will become “a threat to the security of the United States.” The report [summarized in USA Today] is remarkable on two counts. First, of course, is that the cheerleaders are losing their cheery confidence that we will somehow win this game. Second is how pessimistic they become when looking at only one set of threats. According to the report, one way to fight climate change, which already has half the country locked in a vicious drought, is to increase irrigation. Right. And their likely advice to the millions who will be starving when the water runs out and the crops fail: you should eat more. What about topsoil loss, which continues to accelerate despite billions spent on conservation half-measures? What about the rise of pesticide-resistant weeds, bugs and bacteria? What about the poisoning of rivers and lakes, and the dead zones in the oceans? Add all these effects to the report’s slender survey and it’s hard to imagine getting through 25 years before it gets serious. Still, can we expect Big Ag to change its ways now that its own team has issued a report as brutal in its outlook as this one? Hardly. Because the same government that paid for the report gives them cheap insurance against crop failure. Cheap crop insurance — like cheap flood insurance — is a product so ruinous to the insurer that no private company will touch it.
The decade that preceded the 2008 financial crisis was marked by massive global trade imbalances, as the United States ran large bilateral deficits, especially with China. Since the crisis reached its nadir, these imbalances have been partly reversed, with America’s trade deficit, as a share of GDP, declining from its 2006 peak of 5.5% to 3.4% in 2012, and China’s surplus shrinking from 7.7% to 2.8% over the same period. But is this a temporary adjustment, or is long-term rebalancing at hand?
This difference between the United States and Britain is reflected in the burden of their military budgets. Britannia ruled the seas but never the land. The British army was sufficiently small that Otto von Bismarck once quipped that were the British ever to invade Germany, he would simply have the local police force arrest them. Meanwhile, London's advantage over the seas -- it had more tonnage than the next two navies put together -- came at ruinous cost. The U.S. military, in contrast, dominates at every level -- land, sea, air, space -- and spends more than the next 14 countries combined, accounting for almost 50 percent of global defense spending. The United States also  spends more on defense research and development than the rest of the world put together. And crucially, it does all this without breaking the bank. U.S. defense expenditure as a percent of GDP is now 4.1 percent, lower than it was for most of the Cold War (under Dwight Eisenhower, it rose to ten percent). As U.S. GDP has grown larger and larger, expenditures that would have been backbreaking have become affordable. The Iraq war may be a tragedy or a noble endeavor, but either way, it will not bankrupt the United States. The price tag for Iraq and Afghanistan together -- $125 billion a year -- represents less than one percent of GDP. The war in Vietnam, by comparison, cost the equivalent of 1.6 percent of U.S. GDP in 1970, a large difference. (Neither of these percentages includes second- or third-order costs of war, which allows for a fair comparison even if one disputes the exact figures.) U.S. military power is not the cause of its strength but the consequence. The fuel is the United States' economic and technological base, which remains extremely strong. The United States does face larger, deeper, and broader challenges than it has ever faced in its history, and it will undoubtedly lose some share of global GDP. But the process will look nothing like Britain's slide in the twentieth century, when the country lost the lead in innovation, energy, and entrepreneurship. The United States will remain a vital, vibrant economy, at the forefront of the next revolutions in science, technology, and industry. In trying to understand how the United States will fare in the new world, the first thing to do is simply look around: the future is already here. Over the last 20 years, globalization has been gaining breadth and depth. More countries are making goods, communications technology has been leveling the playing field, capital has been free to move across the world -- and the United States has benefited massively from these trends. Its economy has received hundreds of billions of dollars in investment, and its companies have entered new countries and industries with great success. Despite two decades of a very expensive dollar, U.S. exports have held ground, and the World Economic Forum currently ranks the United States as the world's most competitive economy. GDP growth, the bottom line, has averaged just over three percent in the United States for 25 years, significantly higher than in Europe or Japan. Productivity growth, the elixir of modern economics, has been over 2.5 percent for a decade now, a full percentage point higher than the European average. This superior growth trajectory might be petering out, and perhaps U.S. growth will be more typical for an advanced industrialized country for the next few years. But the general point -- that the United States is a highly dynamic economy at the cutting edge, despite its enormous size -- holds.  Consider the industries of the future. Nanotechnology (applied science dealing with the control of matter at the atomic or molecular scale) is likely to lead to fundamental breakthroughs over the next 50 years, and the United States dominates the field. It has more dedicated "nanocenters" than the next three nations (Germany, Britain, and China) combined and has issued more patents for nanotechnology than the rest of the world combined, highlighting its unusual strength in turning abstract theory into practical products. Biotechnology (a broad category that describes the use of biological systems to create medical, agricultural, and industrial products) is also dominated by the United States. Biotech revenues in the United States approached $50 billion in 2005, five times as large as the amount in Europe and representing 76 percent of global biotech revenues. Manufacturing has, of course, been leaving the country, shifting to the developing world and turning the United States into a service economy. This scares many Americans, who wonder what their country will make if everything is "made in China." But Asian manufacturing must be viewed in the context of a global economy. The Atlantic Monthly's James Fallows spent a year in China watching its manufacturing juggernaut up close, and he provides a persuasive explanation of how outsourcing has strengthened U.S. competitiveness. What it comes down to is that the real money is in designing and distributing products -- which the United States dominates -- rather than manufacturing them. A vivid example of this is the iPod: it is manufactured mostly outside the United States, but most of the added value is captured by Apple, in California.
The global financial crisis seemingly shifted economic power away from hard-hit Western countries such as the U.S. and Britain to cash-rich emerging economies such as India and China. But while the West is limping along today, economic power may shift back when growth resumes. Why? Among the nations of the world, developed countries still enjoy considerable advantages in fundamental economic competitiveness—whether based on the quality of their infrastructure and educational systems or the sophistication of their business laws and bureaucracy. That's the conclusion of the 2009 World Competitiveness Yearbook, an annual report published by IMD business school in Lausanne, Switzerland. Based on a detailed analysis of economic output, government and business efficiency, skills, and infrastructure, the researchers ranked 57 of the world's economies to determine which are best placed to succeed in the 21st century economic race. Topping the list for the 16th consecutive year, unchanged from its No. 1 ranking in the 2008 report, was the U.S.—despite a tough economic situation and rising unemployment. With its world-class higher-education system, enormous and diverse economy, and powerful infrastructure, the U.S. continues to be the world's biggest economic engine and top destination for foreign direct investment.
With a recent ratings downgrade, chronic unemployment, a growing budget deficitand a political system that seems determined to self-destruct, it might appear that the U.S. is losing its grip as the world's top economic power. But analysts say that despite the laundry list of troubles—and predications of an American decline—the country is far from losing its ranking as the number one economy on the globe. "The U.S. economy is the largest in the world, and the country has one of the highest average incomes in the world," says Matthew Rafferty, professor of economics in the Quinnipiac University School of Business. "There are few countries that are likely to rival the U.S. in the near future." "I don't see U.S. power being eclipsed in the short term or even medium term," says Usha Haley, professor of international business at Massey University in Auckland, New Zealand. "The U.S. has problems of course, but the demise of the USA is much exaggerated." What's keeping the U.S. afloat in a sea of economic woes, analysts say, is what's kept it upright in the past—innovation and the ability to produce. "Silicon Valley is still the world leader in technology, and Wall Street is still the center of the financial world and of capitalism itself," says Charles Sizemore, CFA and editor of the Sizemore Investment Letter. "And we're manufacturing more today than we did in the 1970s. It's just with less labor." Even in spite of a slowing economy, as shown in the gross domestic product (GDP), the U.S. is still ahead of other countries. Compared to the U.S., most of the major industrialized nations' percentage of GDP is less than half that of the U.S.
“American chemistry is back in the game,” said Dr. Kevin Swift, ACC’s chief economist. “After a decade of lost competitiveness, American chemistry is reemerging as a growth industry. We’re seeing growing end-use markets; strengthening employment; surging exports; and an influx of tremendous capital investment. Put simply, the U.S. is now the most attractive place in the world to invest in chemical manufacturing,” he added. Swift pointed to several key points to illustrate the turnaround in the industry: Over the next five years production is expected to grow by almost 25 percent, pushing industry shipments to $1 trillion by 2018; For the first time since 1999, the U.S. chemical industry is seeing job growth; Shale gas and the surge in natural gas liquids supply has helped moved the U.S. from being a high-cost producer of key petrochemicals and resins to among the lowest cost producers; globally. As a result, exports are surging. The industry has gone from a chemicals trade deficit to a surplus, this year expected to be about $2.8 billion, and by 2018 reaching nearly $30 billion, from almost $300 billion in total exports; Capital investment is exploding. Beginning in 2010, as chemical manufacturers began recovering from the Great Recession there has been double digit growth in capital spending – including equipment upgrades and efficiency investments. Over the next five years we are likely to see more than $60 billion in domestic investment.
US chemical makers are firmly “back in the game” thanks to the cost advantage enabled by low-cost shale feedstocks, according to Swift. US chemical production is expected to rise 2.5% in 2014 and 3.5% in 2015, Swift says. “Following a decade of lost competitiveness, American chemistry is reemerging as a growth industry,” Swift says. US chemicals production will grow strongly through the second half of the decade, as the nearly $100 billion in new chemical investment announced since 2010 comes online. “During the second half of the decade, US chemistry growth is expected to expand at a pace over 4%/year on average, a rate that exceeds that of the overall US economy,” Swift says. The total value of shipments will advance at a slightly stronger pace than production, with shipments values set to exceed $1 trillion in 2018, up from $789 billion in 2013, ACC says. The forecast growth rates are the highest for industry in more than 20 years. “Excluding pharmaceuticals, US [chemical] growth has averaged less than 1%/year since the early 1990s,” says Martha Gilchrist Moore, ACC’s senior director/policy analysis and economics. “This is going to be a real step-up from that level.” US chemicals production excluding pharmaceuticals was up 3.2% in 2013, and growth is expected to slow to 2.6% in 2014. Specialties and agricultural chemicals will drag down the rate in 2014 after advancing strongly the two years prior. Basic chemicals are expected to grow 2.4% in 2014, up from 1.2% in 2013. Chemicals production growth excluding pharmaceuticals will be 3.5% in 2015, 3.8% in 2016, and 4.0% in 2019, according to ACC estimates. US exports will ramp up sharply as production comes online. Exports of chemicals will grow 6.6% in 2014, to $205 billion, and a further 7.6% in 2015. Excluding pharmaceuticals, the surplus in chemicals trade will grow to $67.5 billion by 2018, up from $42.7 billion in 2013, an average of 9.6%/year. The expansion is also reversing the industry’s falling employment trend. Employment in the chemical industry will have grown by 1.3% in 2013 and continue to expand through 2018, ACC says. This growth contrasts with the continuous decline in industry employment between 1999 and 2011.—ROBERT WESTERVELT
Five interesting years of the “Journal of Business Chemistry” (JoBC) have passed and many more are hopefully lying ahead of us, with the 6th volume currently in your hands. The JoBC is read throughout the world. Even though the `sectorial` focus seems quite narrow – concentrating on the chemical and related industries – the overall approach of the JoBC is rather broad and interdisciplinary. As “chemistry” is interwoven with a multitude of rapidly progressing fields, many topics from nano- or biotechnology to pharmaceuticals and materials have also been covered. Management topics from innovation and portfolio management to REACH regulation and investments have been analyzed and discussed.
"In the last four years, the chemical industry has spent $11.2 million on a PR initiative to say it's not their fault, so we know whose fault it is." ― Jon Cooksey, writer, director: How to Boil a Frog. The honey bee, responsible for 80 percent of pollination worldwide, is disappearing globally. Why and why do bees matter? This is no marginal species loss. Honey bees – wild and domestic – perform about 80 percent of all pollination worldwide. A single bee colony can pollinate 300 million flowers each day. Grains are primarily pollinated by the wind, but the best and healthiest food – fruits, nuts, and vegetables – are pollinated by bees. Seventy out of the top 100 human food crops, which supply about 90 percent of the world's nutrition, are pollinated by bees. We know what is killing the bees. Worldwide Bee Colony Collapse is not as big a mystery as the chemical companies claim. The systemic nature of the problem makes it complex, but not impenetrable. Scientists know that bees are dying from a variety of factors – pesticides, drought, habitat destruction, nutrition deficit, air pollution, global heating, and so forth. The causes of collapse merge and synergise, but we know that humanity is the perpetrator, and that the two most prominent causes appear to be pesticides and habitat loss. Worker bees (females) live about 6 weeks in summer, and several months in the winter. Colonies produce new worker bees continuously during the spring and summer, and then reproduction slows during the winter. Typically, a bee hive or colony will decline by 5-10% over the winter, and replace those lost bees in the spring. In a bad year, a bee colony might lose 15-20% of its bees. In the US, winter losses have commonly reached 30-50% and in some cases more. In 2006, David Hackenberg, a bee keeper for 42 years, reported a 90% die-off among his 3,000 hives.US National Agriculture Statistics show a honey bee decline from about 6 million hives in 1947 to 2.4 million hives in 2008, a 60% reduction. The number of working bee colonies per hectare provides a critical metric of crop health. In the US, among crops that require bee pollination, the number of bee colonies per hectare has declined by 90% since 1962. The bees cannot keep pace with the winter die-off rates and habitat loss. Pesticides and bees Biologists have found more than 150 different chemical residues in bee pollen, a deadly "pesticide cocktail" according to University of California apiculturist Eric Mussen. The chemical companies Bayer, Syngenta, BASF, Dow, DuPont, and Monsanto shrug their shoulders at the systemic complexity, as if the mystery were too complicated. They advocate no change in pesticide policy. After all, selling poisons to the world's farmers is profitable. Furthermore, wild bee habitat shrinks every year as industrial agri-business converts grasslands and forest into mono-culture farms, which are then contaminated with pesticides. To reverse the world bees decline, we need to fix our dysfunctional and destructive agricultural system.
The bee is an essential link in the preservation of biodiversity. The reproduction of over 80 per cent of plant species in the world depends primarily on bees. More specifically, 35 per cent of the world’s food production would be threatened by a scarcity of bees. In economic terms, the impact of pollinators represents approximately 10 per cent of agriculture turnover globally. Bees also play an environmental watchdog role as they signal the chemical degradation of the environment in which they live. While the media is focused on the essential nature of domestic bees, a study published in February 2013 in Science Magazine confirms that wild bees are around twice as effective as their counterparts at pollination. In fact, an increase in visits from wild bees increases fruiting twice as much as the same increase with visits from domestic bees. Whether wild or domestic, we cannot live without bees. This is why supporting scientific research is paramount to bee health. We know that bee mortality is multi-factorial. Thus, the presence of parasites such as Varroa and Nosema, diseases such as American foulbrood or European foulbrood, poor beekeeping and farming practices, pesticides, pollution, not to mention nutritional deficiencies (especially pollen) are some key factors in the weakness and mortality phenomena which the global bee population has been facing for many years. However, other avenues remain to be explored. In a report dated 13 March 2014, the European food safety agency called upon the creation of a European research network to develop a global approach in the evaluation of stress factors which affect the health of bees. In addition, to address the problem of excess mortality, adequate training for beekeepers (who are mainly amateurs) is necessary, as well as disseminating best practices, integrating bee health into the veterinary curriculum and providing curriculum specialisation in this field. Concrete measures should be implemented in our regions, particularly rural areas, in order to preserve bees and their habitats. It is also important to involve citizens in this debate through information campaigns and awareness for the general public on issues related to bee health. Europe has also understood that the issue goes far beyond honey production. Without pollen cultures, the whole agricultural system falters. As Albert Einstein said, “If the bee disappears from the surface of the Earth, [humanity] would have no more than four years left to live.”
While the U.S. chemical industry is thriving, especially along the Gulf Coast, Europe’s chemical industry is on its deathbed, said Jim Ratcliffe, chairman of Ineos, a Switzerland-based chemical company with significant Houston-area operations.
The deadly link between the worldwide collapse of honeybee colonies and a bloodsucking parasite has been revealed by scientists. They have discovered that the mite has massively and permanently increased the global prevalence of a fatal bee virus. The varroa mite's role means the virus is now one of the "most widely distributed and contagious insect viruses on the planet", the researchers warned. Furthermore, the new dominance of the killer virus poses an ongoing threat to colonies even after beekeepers have eradicated the mites from hives. Varroa destructor has spread from Asia across the entire world over the past 50 years. It arrived in the UK in 1990 and has been implicated in the halving of bee numbers since then, alongside other factors including the destruction of flowery habitats in which bees feed and the widespread use of pesticides on crops. Bees and other pollinators are vital in the production in up to a third of all the food we eat, but the role the mites played was unclear, as bacteria and fungi are also found in colonies along with the viruses.
Yes, climate change is about the environment. But it's also about the economy. Extensive media coverage of the 829-page federal climate change report released this week largely chronicles the threats already experienced: rising seas, hotter summers and dwindling water assets. Little attention was paid to how those threats could damage our vulnerable economy, especially to Tampa Bay and Florida. The impact might be severe and land sooner than we might think. The scientific report, the "National Climate Assessment," points out how Floridians with jobs ranging from coastal planners and insurance agents to home builders and tourism executives already are dealing with the early effects of climate change. South of the Tampa Bay region in Charlotte County, transportation officials are looking beyond typical "smart growth" plans that concentrate growth in urban centers. They also embrace "resilient growth" plans to steer development away from areas vulnerable to rising seas. Record-setting state tourism also could fall prey. "Some of Florida's top tourist attractions, including the Everglades and Florida Keys, are threatened by sea level rise," the report states. It estimates tourism losses of $9 billion by 2025 and $40 billion by the 2050s. Here's something we already see: Homes in lower-lying areas are becoming economic pariahs. As flooding increases, tougher construction rules keep raising home prices. Already volatile flood insurance costs will spur migration away from coastlines in the coming decades. Even if only half of these forecasts occur, we might be in a world of economic hurt. What to do? We could adopt "hard" approaches and build pricey seawalls and levees. We could pursue "soft" methods by elevating more structures or using natural barriers such as wetlands. Or, the report says, we could retreat from the vulnerable parts of the state. Florida and Tampa Bay also face the threat of saltwater intrusion that can pollute sources of drinking water. That could prompt more reser­voirs and even more desalination plants such as the $158 mil­lion Apollo Beach unit that took seven years to function. The National Climate Assessment estimates that more than $1 trillion of the nation's property and structures are "at risk of inundation" if sea levels rise 2 more feet. "Roughly half of the vulnerable property value is located in Florida," the report warns, with Tampa Bay among places most likely to get soaked. By 2100, if seas rise 4 feet, look for a cumulative cost of $325 billion to the U.S. economy in responding to widespread flooding, the report says. Florida's portion of that bill? Try $130 billion. How is Florida's leadership dealing with this? Too many take the approach they take on many of the state's complex matters: They deny the problem exists. Or they're happy to let the next generation sweat the details.
It will take a lot more than higher fuel costs and more foreclosures to send Florida's economy into recession, according to the latest economic forecast from the University of Central Florida. Those factors have slowed the state's economic expansion, but not really hurt it, the forecast concludes. "It looks like it will take a combination of negative shocks to precipitate the next recession, such as a housing slowdown combined with one or more of the following: $100 per barrel oil, a large interest rate spike due to slowdown in capital flows from the rest of the world or inflation taking root," said Sean Snaith, director of the Institute for Economic Competitiveness at UCF. The Gainesville metropolitan area is expected to see one of the lowest average quarterly unemployment rates in the state over the next three years at 2.8 percent, the report says. The average growth rate will be 5.8 percent over that period. Professional and business services should experience the strongest growth at 4.7 percent, followed by leisure at 2.2 percent and trade, transportation and utilities at 1.9 percent.
Europe will be remain dependent on Russian gas for years, ministers from the Group of Seven industrial nations said yesterday (6 May), condemning the use of energy as a weapon of political coercion. "I don't know anyone in the world who could tell us how Europe's dependency on importing Russian gas can be changed in the short term," German Economy and Energy Minister Sigmar Gabriel told reporters. Meeting in Rome as the crisis in Ukraine intensified, G7 energy ministers said they were "extremely concerned about the energy security implications of developments in Ukraine as a consequence of Russia's violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity." They promised to improve energy efficiency, develop a broader mix of energy supplies - including liquefied natural gas (LNG), renewables and new gas pipelines - and to invest in strengthening the existing supply network infrastructure. But there were no immediate alternatives, they admitted. US shale gas was not expected to aid Europe until at least the end of the decade, when it could be imported from tankers as LNG. Both Italy and France restated their support for the South Stream pipeline project, which will bring gas from Russia into Europe bypassing Ukraine - while also declaring the need to build up alternative channels. A third of the EU's gas imports is from Russia, with almost half of that passing through Ukraine, which is in another pricing dispute with Russian gas exporter Gazprom, its third in the past decade. The final statement from the meeting concentrated on the need to diversify sources of energy and build up gas infrastructure and interconnectivity. "We are committed to initiate a systemic and enduring step change to improve energy security at national, regional and global levels," the ministers said. Sanctions No decisions were taken on whether or not to toughen the targeted sanctions, which have already been applied against members of the Russian elite. That will be left to foreign ministers and heads of government. However US Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz said that if the situation in Ukraine continued to escalate, G7 leaders could "move forward, as they have agreed, in terms of elevating sanctions, particularly, at some point, moving towards sectorial sanctions." Tough rhetoric from Britain and the United States contrasted with a greater emphasis on diplomacy from Germany. British Energy Minister Ed Davey said that Russian President Vladimir Putin had "crossed a line" and that the G7 meeting had taken a "strategic decision that we will face up to the use by Russia of energy as a weapon". Germany's Gabriel said that any solution to the long term problem of energy security in Europe would have to rely on dialogue. "Pure technical changes in the energy market will not be enough. The process needs to be accompanied by diplomacy and politics and agreement on contracts between partners," he said. With political action unlikely to produce any quick solution, countries like Italy, which relies almost completely on imported energy, are looking at widening its supply sources. In addition to South Stream, Rome has been placing increasing importance on completing the Trans Adriatic Pipeline (TAP) to bring Azeri gas to Italy and is also looking at developing a gas link with the east Mediterranean area. Italy is also looking to develop at least three more LNG terminals on top of the three it has to take shale gas from North America, but U.S. export terminals will not be ready soon. "A first project will be ready to start at the end of 2015 while another 6 terminals are planned but won't be ready till the end of the decade," U.S. Energy Secretary Moniz said. "The process however does not determine where the shipments will go," he added.
Germany imports a lot of natural gas and oil from Russia. In fact, Russia makes up around a third of Germany’s total natural gas supply. But in 2012, natural gas only made up around 21 percent (statistics in German) of German energy supply from 2000-2012 (in terms of primary energy). Imports of Russian natural gas thus constitute seven percent of German energy supply. Oil makes up around a third of German energy supply. Slightly more than a third of this oil is imported from Russia, so add on another 12-13 percent. Germany also gets roughly a quarter of its hard coal from Russia, with hard coal coming in at a little over 12 percent of primary energy supply on average in the past five years – so add on another three percent, and Germany gets roughly 22-23 percent of its primary energy from Russia. That makes Russia Germany’s single largest energy supplier. The figure floated on social media is closer to 40 percent dependency. Does that make Germany dependent on Russia, or Russia dependent on Germany? In recent years, the dispute between Russia and Ukraine has drawn a lot of attention, but one fact has been overlooked – the Ukrainians do not have to pay market prices. Russia offers Ukraine a “friendship discount,” which was recently a third of the price countries like Germany are willing to pay. In the current conflict, Russia is once again using this discount to its advantage. But if the Russians lose the Germans as customers, they lose a client paying top dollar. It’s quite possible that the current conflict will lead to gas supplies to the EU via Ukraine being cut off completely for a time, though Germany has had its own direct gas pipeline under the North sea for the past few years. Depending on what facilities are in place for international shipping, Germany and the EU will simply switch to other sources on international markets – something more easily done for oil than natural gas. The share of natural gas in space heating has increased over the years in Germany and is now nearly 50 percent, with heating oil still coming in close to 30 percent. In contrast, electricity only covered 5.4 percent of heat demand in 2012. The current crisis in Ukraine is therefore unlikely to affect Germany’s nuclear phaseout because nuclear only provides electricity. Source: BDEW Some nuclear proponents seem to think that Germany’s nuclear phaseout has made it more dependent on Russian gas, but nuclear is only used to generate electricity, and as the official statistics for gross power production in Germany show the share of natural gas was down by 1.6 percentage points in 2013 to a mere 10.5 percent, considerably lower than the 14.1 percent in 2010 (before Merkel’s nuclear phaseout in 2011). Should energy supplies slow down, Russia might suffer more than the EU, which can try to source supplies elsewhere. But lost sales revenue through Ukraine really is lost for the time being, and economic warfare against Russia has already begun.
Nonetheless, there are some who speculate that hydrogen is simply too dangerous to ever be safely used for cars. Peter Voyentzie of Danbury, Connecticut's Energy Research Corporation, which makes large stationary fuel cell power plants, is skeptical about automotive applications. "Hydrogen is a strange beast," he says. "It's the smallest molecule, and it leaks out of everything. You also can't see it burn. In a car, it has to remain stable through collisions and constant agitation. ¶ That's a lot to expect."
The dream of a hydrogen economy is a seductive dream, and President Bush in his State of the Union address and in follow-up speeches pulled on America's collective heartstrings. In announcing his initiative to fund $1.2 billion overall and new spending of $720 million over five years to develop technology and infrastructure to produce hydrogen fueled cars, he called on us to imagine a futuristic America.¶ He asked us to imagine a society that drives in environmentally friendly vehicles and is so technologically enlightened it harnesses the power of the sun (fusion power) to produce all the necessary hydrogen to fuel those cars. Not to mention, in the president's words, "One of the greatest results of using hydrogen power, of course, will be energy independence for this nation ... [which] will make future citizens less dependent on foreign sources of energy."¶ Certainly, there are powerfully patriotic ideas interwoven into this hydrogen initiative. But while the president should be commended for providing leadership on this issue, there are a number of tradeoffs--environmental sacrifices and choices that may have to be made if some of the technologies he plans to develop are not realized. Will America be able to live with those choices?¶ Fusion Power. The Hydrogen Plan's Achilles' Heel¶   Bush asks us "to imagine a world in which our cars are driven by hydrogen and our homes are heated from electricity from a fusion power plant."¶ The president believes the hydrogen produced in fusion power plants could create a market for the commodity. Certainly, fusion power plants are a bigger part of a future hydrogen complex than the president may be ready to admit. Otherwise, America's current energy mix may not be able to support a hydrogen infrastructure without increasing environmental emissions, or commodity prices. Furthermore, there is some debate as to whether the Department of Energy is taking the right track as far as fusion is concerned (see Public Utilities Fortnightly, Feb. 1, 2003, "Fusion Power: The Burning Issue"). That is why a trade-off may be required.¶   For example, Bush's hydrogen economy plan touches every piece of the American energy complex. In his Feb. 6 speech, he said, "First, hydrogen can be produced from domestic sources -- initially, natural gas; eventually, biomass, ethanol, clean coal, or nuclear energy."¶ In calling for natural gas, the president calls all utility companies that seek, produce or distribute natural gas to the table. There is no doubt that natural gas is a good, environmentally friendly choice, but how expensive is the commodity likely to become if it needs to meet the demand of millions of automobiles? Last year, Dr. Henry Linden offered a counterpoint to my investigation to electrolytic hydrogen (Feb. 15, 2002, "Let's Be )) Rational About Hydrogen as a Vehicular Fuel ). Linden called for packaged natural gas steam reformers in the early stages of the hydrogen infrastructure's development. Down the line, he would like to see high-tech renewables producing the hydrogen. Furthermore, he sees coal gasification as a transition plan to build lead-time to develop sustainable, climate-friendly energy technologies. "A promising alternative would be to gasify coal and lignite to hydrogen, and use this hydrogen as the transition fuel for central and distributed power generation, and surface and air transport," wrote Linden (Nov. 15, 2002, "Bridging the Carbon Gap")¶ Natural gas can be part of the solution, but it will have to work in concert with other fuels.¶ Electrolytic Hydrogen: Only If Clean Coal Is Really Clean¶ In President Bush naming dean coal and nuclear energy as supporting the hydrogen complex, it can be inferred that electric utilities could be part of the answer to the production and transportation question by producing electrolytic hydrogen. In February 2002, when I first investigated this issue, I found a study by Virginia-based Directed Technologies that spoke of the generation mix needed to support a hydrogen infrastructure (Feb. 1, 2002 "Forgetting Someone, Mr. Secretary?"). I think it bears a review.¶ According to Directed Technologies-assuming that off-peak electricity could be purchased at 4 cents/kWh-- electrolyzers could provide lower-cost hydrogen for small fuel cell automobile fleets or for public fueling stations during the early phases of fuel cell vehicle (FCV) penetration.¶ The problem, according to the report, is that electrolytic hydrogen has one major barrier in the United States: over 55 percent of all U.S. electricity is generated from coal. Using electrolytic hydrogen would actually double greenhouse gas emissions compared with conventional gasoline operation, using the average marginal U.S. grid generation mix, the report says.¶ "[Yet], as the electrical generation grid moves to increased use of renewable electricity and/or nuclear power, the FCV powered by electrolytic hydrogen will eventually be superior to even an FCV running on hydrogen from natural gas," says the report. Directed Technologies actually analyzed the grid generation mix that would result in greenhouse gas parity for the FCV running on electrolytic hydrogen compared to conventional gasoline operation.¶ But achieving this parity may take a long time. Directed Technologies points out that the DOE's Energy Information Administration does not project significant growth in renewables and nuclear until 2020. The company predicts it might not happen for at least three decades.
A few years ago there were a number of automotive manufacturers putting serious money into hydrogen fuel-cell vehicles. These vehicles promised to have a driving range similar to a conventional gasoline-powered automobile, but produce no emissions to pollute the atmosphere.¶ However, the vehicles faced several daunting challenges, including the lack of a hydrogen fuel infrastructure and the fact that hydrogen is highly flammable and difficult to store.¶ Volkswagen CEO Martin Winterkorn stated this week that hydrogen fuel cells have failed to live up to promises and are unlikely to become an efficient and cost-effective way to power cars in the near future.¶   Winterkorn said, "I do not see the infrastructure for fuel cell vehicles, and I do not see how hydrogen can be produced on large scale at reasonable cost. I do not currently see a situation where we can offer fuel cell vehicles at a reasonable cost that consumers would also be willing to pay."¶ While Volkswagen doesn't see a near-term future with hydrogen vehicles, other manufacturers continue to move forward with the technology. Mercedes-Benz reached a deal with Ford and Nissan-Renault with a goal of selling the first production fuel-cell vehicle starting in 2017.¶ Back in 2010, a study was published predicting 670,000 fuel cell powered vehicles would be sold annually within a decade. So far, that prediction doesn't seem likely to come true.
It wasn’t too many year’s ago that many thought the U.S., and perhaps the world, was on track to be fueled by hydrogen. Hydrogen and fuel cells seemed a suitable replacement for petroleum fuels and internal combustion engines. Hydrogen packs plenty of energy. Cars and trucks would have the same get-up and go as running on gasoline or diesel fuel. With big enough tanks, fuel cell powered vehicles would have the same range per fill-up as conventional vehicles, but could also have unlimited range with hydrogen dispensed from pumps in a network of filling stations. And, big oil would be more than happy to provide hydrogen keeping them in fueling business.¶ It all sounded pretty good until reality and other technologies struck.¶   --- A hydrogen economy would have needed its own expensive fueling infrastructure. Think hundreds of billions of dollars to build it. Who would pay? Big oil wouldn’t do it without government help but government wasn’t all that interested.¶ --- Hydrogen is everywhere but has to be extracted. The cheapest way to get hydrogen was (and still is today) from natural gas, so the notion that fuel cell vehicles produced only water, well, vaporized. Extracting hydrogen from natural gas takes energy, plus when hydrogen is removed from natural gas the remainder is carbon dioxide (and an few other things) exactly what was trying to be avoided.¶ --- Other clean vehicle technologies picked up steam. Gasoline and diesel-electric hybrids gained popular acceptance. Lithium-ion batteries suddenly got much better thanks to the computer industry. Nearly as quickly as batteries improved, battery-electric vehicles poised to stage a comeback. (Battery electric vehicles had gotten shoved aside by the flirtation with a hydrogen economy.)¶ --- The economic crash of 2007-2008 didn’t help hydrogen commercialization and research.
“The advantages of hydrogen praised by journalists (non-toxic, burns to water, abundance of hydrogen in the Universe, etc.) are misleading, because the production of hydrogen depends on the availability of energy and water, both of which are increasingly rare and may become political issues, as much as oil and natural gas are today,” says Bossel.¶ “There is a lot of money in the field now,” he continues. “I think that it was a mistake to start with a ‘Presidential Initiative’ rather with a thorough analysis like this one. Huge sums of money were committed too soon, and now even good scientists prostitute themselves to obtain research money for their students or laboratories—otherwise, they risk being fired. But the laws of physics are eternal and cannot be changed with additional research, venture capital or majority votes.”¶ Even though many scientists, including Bossel, predict that the technology to establish a hydrogen economy is within reach, its implementation will never make economic sense, Bossel argues.¶ “In the market place, hydrogen would have to compete with its own source of energy, i.e. with ("green") electricity from the grid,” he says. “For this reason, creating a new energy carrier is a no-win solution. We have to solve an energy problem not an energy carrier problem."¶ A wasteful process¶ In his study, Bossel analyzes a variety of methods for synthesizing, storing and delivering hydrogen, since no single method has yet proven superior. To start, hydrogen is not naturally occurring, but must be synthesized.¶ “Ultimately, hydrogen has to be made from renewable electricity by electrolysis of water in the beginning,” Bossel explains, “and then its energy content is converted back to electricity with fuel cells when it’s recombined with oxygen to water. Separating hydrogen from water by electrolysis requires massive amounts of electrical energy and substantial amounts of water.”¶ Also, hydrogen is not a source of energy, but only a carrier of energy. As a carrier, it plays a role similar to that of water in a hydraulic heating system or electrons in a copper wire. When delivering hydrogen, whether by truck or pipeline, the energy costs are several times that for established energy carriers like natural gas or gasoline. Even the most efficient fuel cells cannot recover these losses, Bossel found. For comparison, the "wind-to-wheel" efficiency is at least three times greater for electric cars than for hydrogen fuel cell vehicles.¶ Another headache is storage. When storing liquid hydrogen, some gas must be allowed to evaporate for safety reasons—meaning that after two weeks, a car would lose half of its fuel, even when not being driven. Also, Bossel found that the output-input efficiency cannot be much above 30%, while advanced batteries have a cycle efficiency of above 80%. In every situation, Bossel found, the energy input outweighs the energy delivered by a factor of three to four.¶ “About four renewable power plants have to be erected to deliver the output of one plant to stationary or mobile consumers via hydrogen and fuel cells,” he writes. “Three of these plants generate energy to cover the parasitic losses of the hydrogen economy while only one of them is producing useful energy.”¶ This fact, he shows, cannot be changed with improvements in technology. Rather, the one-quarter efficiency is based on necessary processes of a hydrogen economy and the properties of hydrogen itself, e.g. its low density and extremely low boiling point, which increase the energy cost of compression or liquefaction and the investment costs of storage.
In a sliver of good economic news during an Indian election that is widely focused on economic growth, the World Bank announced in a report on Tuesday that India overtook Japan as the world’s third largest economy in terms of purchasing power parity (PPP). According to the World Bank’s International Comparison Program (ICP) data, India holds a 6.4 percent share of global GDP on a PPP basis. The United States remains in first place with a 17.1 percent share and China trails it at 14.9 percent. Japan, while still the world’s third largest economy in nominal terms, holds a 4.8 percent share of global wealth.
TOKYO — Japan's economy is slowing following a sales tax hike but not as badly as some economists feared, according to two business surveys released Tuesday.
TOKYO, June 19 (Reuters) - Confidence of Japanese manufacturers held steady in June while the service-sector mood rebounded from the prior month, a Reuters poll showed, further signs of resilience in the economy despite the pain of a sales tax hike that took effect weeks ago.
(Reuters) - U.S. manufacturing ended the year on a high note, growing in December at its fastest pace in 11 months, while the rate of job growth was the swiftest since March, an industry report showed on Thursday.
Oil is a critical source of energy. In the past, a major oil price shock meant devastation for economic growth.
Daniel Yergin, Pulitzer Prize winning author and Vice Chairman of global consulting firm IHS spoke at the 2014 EIA Conference in Washington D.C. on Monday. EIA, the U.S. Energy Information Association is the statistics arm of the federal Department of Energy and the conference featured leading figures from industry, academia and government.
The world has entered a zone of maximum upheaval. From the Atlas Mountains of North Africa to the Hindu Kush, in Afghanistan, the Middle East is in flames. The destruction of a Malaysian airline over Ukraine, almost certainly shot down by Russian-backed separatist rebels, threatens war in the Black Sea region. Libya is being torn apart by competing militias, while parts of Iraq are under assault by the murderous Islamist force known as ISIS. Syria remains a bloody horror show, and Israeli troops have launched a ground invasion of Gaza. At no time since the terror attacks of 2001 has the world seen such conflict and instability.
KARACHI: Despite problems of terrorism and energy crisis, the economic outlook of Pakistan improved last fiscal with inflation remaining in single digit and foreign remittances showing a rise, the State Bank of Pakistan said today. Pakistan follows a financial year beginning July 1-June 30. Unveiling its bi-monthly monetary policy for the new fiscal, the Bank kept the key interest rate unchanged at 10 per cent and forecast a CPI inflation rate of 7.5-8.5 per cent during the year. Governor State bank, Ashraf Mehmood Wathra told a news conference that despite the problems of energy crisis and terrorism in the country the economic outlook had improved in the last fiscal year. This he said was due to improved foreign remittances, better tax returns and reduced government borrowing from the banks. "But more tax reforms have to be undertaken to overcome the budget deficit and also improve the overall economic scenario," he said. Wathra said the government borrowing from banks had decreased in the last fiscal year while private sector had availed loans of 329 billion rupees during the period. This was a positive indicator of development taking place in private sector. He said that rate of inflation remained below 10 percent in the last fiscal year and was expected to remain unchanged in next two months. He said the foreign remittances had increased in the last six months with forex reserves with the central bank at USD 9.6 billion.
Pak-China Joint Chamber of Commerce and Industry President Shah Faisal Afridi termed the current assessment of Pakistan's economy by "Moody's" as a green signal to the international investors for investing in Pakistan, which will also strengthen Chinese Investors' confidence in Pakistan. Commenting on Moody's assessment, President PCJCCI said the government has met 10 of 17 structural benchmarks to set the economy on track for achieving further improvements. He observed that upward rating has, in fact, resulted from successful and timely completion of the IMF aided programs, improvements in the external liquidity position and infrastructure advancement that eventually had led the economy to a higher growth trajectory. He was of the view that positive trends of Pakistan's economy as identified by an independent and credible international source like Moody's would help grow foreign investors confidence on present government's policies relating to the trade and industry in the country. He added that Moody had appreciated energy sector reforms and improvement measures to be introduced by the present government of Pakistan along with privatisation of the state-owned enterprises, which shows that no matter how much pessimist you are about Pakistan and its economy or future in general; or no matter how much resentment you brew for the current Pakistani government, one cannot deny authenticity and validity of Moody's. Moody's is the bond credit rating business which is respected all over the globe, and when it says positive or negative, the world believes. Shah Faisal Afridi said Moody's positive and stable outlook means that government of Pakistan is very well capable of supporting its banks as well as paying its loans back, which means that the interlink between banks and government is transparent and stable putting the risk profile at low and investment options highly stable and profitable. He said this is the third bullish assessment of Pakistan's economy by a significant institutional player, after the other two coming from the International Monetary Fund and the State Bank over the past two weeks. He said the G-8 and other developed countries get Moody's research and market prediction to invest and provide loans and project funding at international level. Therefore, the positive opinion given by Moody's on Pakistan's economy is a good omen for foreign investment including the investment coming from China, he added.
Pakistan’s economy is at a turning point, says the World Bank’s bi-annual Pakistan Development Update, launched today. Growth recovery is underway, with projected GDP growth approaching four percent, driven by dynamic manufacturing and service sectors, better energy availability, and early revival of investor confidence. Inflation is steady at 7.9%. The fiscal deficit is contained at around six percent of GDP due to improved tax collection and restricted current and development expenditure. The current account deficit remains modest, at around one percent of GDP, supported by strong remittances and export dynamism, and the external position is slowly improving since monetary and exchange rate policies switched gear towards rebuilding reserves last November. Economic activity is gradually improving says the report. Preliminary data for Fiscal Year 2014 (July 2013-June 2014) shows economic growth is picking up, driven mainly by services and manufacturing. Acceleration in growth of large-scale manufacturing came from strong performance of agro-based industries, iron and steel, construction, and external demand-driven cotton yarn- and fabrics-based textiles. Agriculture appears slightly below target owing to unfavorable weather conditions. On the demand side, growth continues to be driven by private consumption. However, private investment recovery is mild; and much of this is inherited from the crowding out of private-sector credit by government borrowing, which grew at close to nil in FY13. Loose fiscal stance being corrected A significant correction is taking place to ensure sustainability. Pakistan is on track to meet a fiscal deficit target of 5.8% of GDP in FY14. However revenue collection is slightly below target. On the expenditure side, energy-related subsidies have been reduced with tariff adjustments. However, while the government dealt with the stock of the circular debt, resulting in reduced load-shedding in the first months of the year, circular debt is re-emerging. Public investment –constrained by lack of fiscal space and any commitment to reduce the fiscal deficit –remains contained. Public debt remains above the 60% of GDP allowed by the Fiscal Responsibility Law, and justified by security reasons. As large fiscal deficits have been financed increasingly through domestic borrowing, rollover risk has increased. External financing available to the government is scarce, but expected to improve in the last two quarters. The external position is fragile but strengthening. The current account deficit was small, at around 1 percent of GDP by end-FY13 and remains so. In contrast, net official foreign exchange reserves have risen to 1.1 month of imports, up from a low of 20 days at the end of November 2013. This is due in part to the fact that since the second quarter of FY14, the State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) increased its policy rate and has started to purchase dollars on the spot market, turning decisively toward rebuilding the external position. Three sources of risk Three sources of risk appear worrisome. Pakistan imports more than it exports, the latter being constrained by low productivity and competitiveness, limited access to reliable energy, and cumbersome business regulations. Political events keep FDI flows and private investment low, which also affects foreign reserves. An uncertain political environment undermines investor confidence and depresses economic activity. The troubled domestic energy sector continues to endure a long-due complex inheritance on its circular debt which, contrary to the government’s plans, might affect the magnitude of fiscal adjustment. However, Pakistan’s Emerging Markets Bonds Index Plus (EMBI+) risk spread keeps declining from the high levels shown at the start of the new administration last year. Market confidence in the government’s program is bearing fruit, as the EMBI has almost halved from 1,011 basis points in March 2013 to around 468 basis points as of March 26, 2014. The government intends to benefit from it and return to the international markets with the placement of a $500 million-$1 billion Eurobond in the fourth quarter of the current fiscal year.
Isolationism is not protectionism. And confusing the two can create a false impression of the trajectory of U.S. global engagement in the year ahead. New polling data showing that the American public is turning inward, preoccupied with domestic affairs and less interested in international engagement, is not evidence of a rise in U.S. economic protectionism, with its grave consequences for global business. Indeed, even as their doubts grow over the future U.S. geopolitical role, Americans say that the benefits from U.S. participation in the global economy outweigh the risks. And even as they harbor doubts about the impact of trade agreements on wages and jobs, public support for closer trade and business ties with other nations stands at its highest point in more than a decade. The Obama administration’s disengagement from Iraq and Afghanistan, its “leading from behind” in Libya and its reluctance to become involved in the Syrian civil war all reflect a broad public reassessment of America’s future security role in the world. But the White House’s pursuit of the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, two unprecedented trade deals, equally reflect Americans’ newfound acceptance of the importance – or at least inevitability – of U.S. economic integration with the rest of the world. Still, 2014 could well prove to be a year when the United States is less globally engaged geopolitically, even while it is more engaged economically. Americans say that the country does too much to solve world problems, and increasingly they want their leaders to pay more attention to problems at home. About half the public see the United States as overextended abroad, according to a recent Pew Research Center survey. When asked to describe why they feel this way, nearly half cite problems at home, including the economy, which they say should get more attention instead. More from GPS: Americans see declining U.S. prestige And such skepticism about international engagement has increased. Currently, about half the public says the United States “should mind its own business internationally and let other countries get along the best they can on their own.” Such public international ennui has waxed and waned at various times in recent history, most notably after the Vietnam War. But this is the most lopsided split in favor of the U.S. “minding its own business” in the nearly 50 years this question has been asked. Yet the American public expresses no such reluctance about U.S. involvement in the global economy. About three-in-four Americans say that growing trade and business ties between the United States and other countries are good for the nation. And such support for increased trade and business connections has increased 24 percentage points since 2008. Moreover, at a time of deep partisan divides on many issues, Americans are united in endorsing global economic engagement. Solid majorities of Republicans, Democrats and independents describe increased international trade and business ties as good for the U.S. By more than two-to-one, Americans also see more benefits than risks from greater involvement in the global economy. This includes large majorities across education and income categories, as well as most Republicans, Democrats and independents. To be sure, the public has worries about globalization. A 2010 Pew Research Center survey found that a majority of the public said free trade agreements lead to job losses. And a plurality said that free trade deals lower wages. Nevertheless, majorities wanted to increase trade with both Europe and Japan – the principal participants in the current transatlantic and transpacific trade negotiations. And Americans are of two minds about foreign investment. Amid forecasts of massive new Chinese investment in the United States over the next decade, a majority says that more foreign companies setting up operations in the United States would mostly help the economy. But nearly three-quarters think that the economy would be hurt if more U.S. companies move their operations abroad. So what does all this suggest? The prophecies of America’s retreat from the world are premature. Americans may want a less forward-leaning geopolitical posture in the world, but they still support greater U.S. global economic engagement with it.
Politicians and some trade groups have begun to lobby the U.S. to pursue trade sanctions against China. At the same time, they warn that U.S. retaliatory trade barriers will cause the price of solar panels and other technologies to rise, create economic inefficiencies and slow innovation. “If you don't believe in free trade and the market system, then you can look to North Korea for a roadmap for economic development,” one person told me. On the other hand, executives like Bill Watkins, CEO of LED manufacturer Bridgelux, says “Buy American” provisions remain one of the best and simplest ways to grow the market. Think of it for a second. What if the federal government created a fund that would pay communities to upgrade their streetlights to LEDs with a caveat that 60 percent of the equipment came from U.S.-based facilities? Energy consumption would be reduced, municipalities would see their power bills decline, and the fund could be paid in part through the tax revenues coming from those booming lighting and construction firms. Everybody, potentially, wins. This debate is further fueled by the fact that nearly everyone’s opinion gets colored by a subjective worldview. Is the government an encroaching evil or the people that keep rat droppings out of burger meat? See the comments: the issue arouses emotions. Personally, I come down on the side of experimental protectionism. We should try Buy American and Buy Local standards, and in a few years' time, pick which ones work best, if any. We have some with the ARRA and the DoD has imposed some already. Oil and coal get subsidies. What’s the worse that could happen? An uptick to 9.8 percent unemployment? Here are the traditional bullet points why: 1. Everyone Else Does It. Does China play fair under WTO rules? Does Europe? Does anyone reading this enjoy a thriving export business in Japan? Look around the globe and you will find policies directed at building economies through industrial subsidies and limiting contracts to local suppliers that arguably run afoul of trade agreements. "In Michigan, we will give you the whole factory, land included," Michael Eckhart of ACORE said in October. "In 2004, 2005 and 2006, we asked [China] to become more efficient. The darn thing is, is that they did it and we got left in the dust. When I am wearing my U.S. hat, I say this is a threat. But when I wear my renewables hat, I have to say this is the best thing that ever happened." We already give out stimuli. Buy American provisions can further level the playing field. 2. We Need Middle-Class Job Growth. A few years back, a well-known investor suggested to me that displaced IT workers could find new careers in “elder care.” It reminded me of a summer job a friend once had. It involved applying Tuck’s Medicated Pads (for cooling relief!) to a woman in a terminal care facility. Is this really the kind of opportunity you want to bequeath to the upcoming generation? 3. IP Jobs Can’t Employ Everyone. The oft-heard prescription for economic recovery is that Americans should aspire to “high value” jobs with a heavy emphasis on intellectual property. Unfortunately, not everyone is smart enough, or has the time, to get a PhD in biochemistry. IP firms don’t employ massive numbers, either. The countries held up as paragons of the IP model -- Finland, Israel, Singapore, Taiwan -- have somewhat small populations. 4. Buyers Have Freedom. Most of these laws do not put restrictions on individuals or private organizations. They only require federal, state or local agencies buy a certain percentage of their products and services from U.S. suppliers. Why can’t the Department of Defense choose its vendors? Free trade advocates mistakenly imply that price should be the only determining factor when picking a vendor. Instead, buyers can use any criteria -- good of the community, real estate tax benefits, longstanding relationships -- they like this side of outright bribery. If the DoD thinks a sound economy begets national security, so be it. 5. It’s Not That Mystifying. Late last year, Suntech Power Holdings, the large Chinese solar maker, opened a module assembly facility in Arizona. Why? To qualify under Buy in America statutes. The company also selects U.S. polysilicon, one of our strongest exports, to do the same. Meanwhile, A-Power Technologies, a Chinese wind turbine maker, is building a factory in Nevada for the same reasons. Dialight hailed a decision this week that limits lighting projects sponsored by ARRA money to U.S. manufacturers. Dialight comes from the U.K. but has a U.S. subsidiary. People can figure out how to make it work. 6. Wall Street Will Comply. Investors and venture capitalists, when faced with more government restrictions, will walk away from energy, some claim.
The goal of this short empirical paper is to show that protectionism has not been counter‐cyclic since the Second World War. This result is robust; I use eighteen measures of protectionism, seven measures of the business cycle, and a variety of controls, in an annual postwar panel of data spanning more than sixty countries over thirty years. This result seems natural; it is exemplified by the absence of any dramatic outbreak of protection associated with the Great Recession of 2008‐09. But this result is also striking; as a stylized fact, acyclic protectionism is grossly inconsistent with the literature. Any of the theoretical studies of the determinants of protectionism that relies on this false generalization (five are sketched above) may therefore be of limited interest. If the profession wants to understand the determinants of protectionism it should do so from a solid empirical footing. I use a historical panel going back 140 years to show that protectionism was probably counter‐ cyclic earlier, though it is hard to be definitive because there is little quality data of relevance before WWII. I have been unsuccessful in explaining why protectionism is no longer counter‐cyclic; there is little support for any hypothesis that can be quantified. In contrast to more recent times, before WWI tariffs contributed greatly to the national treasury, there was no GATT, and the gold standard ruled. Recent data indicate that protectionist policies of countries with differing fiscal situations react similarly to business cycles, as do those of countries inside/outside the GATT/WTO, those with fixed/floating exchange rates, small/large countries, and open/closed countries. If there has been a shift in the cyclicality of protectionism since WWII, it’s hard to be sure why. This topic awaits further research. Perhaps, just perhaps, the switch in the cyclicality of protectionism – if there has indeed been one – is a triumph of modern economics. After all, there is considerable and strong consensus among economists that protectionism is generally bad for welfare.35 And there is no doubt that economists are aware and actively involved in combating counter‐cyclic protectionism; this was especially visible during the Great Recession, which saw the successful launch of Global Trade Alert in June 2009.36 If – and it’s a big if – the efforts of the economic profession are part of the reason that protectionism is no longer counter‐cyclic, then the profession deserves a collective pat on the back. But in that case the profession should also consider setting its sights higher. If economists have helped reduce the cyclicality of protectionism, then perhaps they should focus on simply reducing protectionism.
The entire political‐economy literature without exception (to the best of my knowledge), agrees that protectionism is counter‐cyclic. The abstract of Bagwell and Staiger (2003) begins “Empirical studies have repeatedly documented the countercyclical nature of trade barriers”; for support, they provide citations of eight papers which “all conclude that the average level of protection tends to rise in recessions and fall in booms.” Rodrik (1995, p. 1486) states “That the average tariff level tends to rise in recessions is a robust finding in the literature…” Costinot (2009, p. 1011) states “One very robust finding of the empirical literature on trade protection is the positive impact of unemployment on the level of trade barriers. The same pattern can be observed across industries, among countries, and over time …” McKeown (1984, p. 215) states: “That tariff levels and economic growth rates tend to move in opposite directions is a venerable piece of conventional wisdom. As early as 1879, Gustav Schmoller, the famous economist of the German historical school, noted that, ‘The times of boom, of increasing exports, of new openings of overseas markets, are the natural free trade epochs, while the reverse is true in times of foreign slumps, of depressions, of crisis.’”1 Most of the literature that studies the determinants and incidence of protectionism is cross‐ sectional in nature.2 That is, it addresses questions like “Why do certain industries/areas/interest groups receive protectionism, while others do not?” Perhaps the most prominent recent example is Grossman and Helpman (1994), a seminal paper which has generated a number of empirical tests, including Goldberg and Maggi (1999) and Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000). By way of contrast, the focus of this paper is on the time‐series variation of protectionism;  I ask “How does protectionism respond to business cycle fluctuations?” Received Wisdom The literature provides evidence that protectionism was counter‐cyclic before the Second World War. Hansen (1990) uses American pre‐WWII data and shows that (p. 539) “During economic recessions, the federal government posted taxes [tariffs] 4.69 percentage points higher than it did during expansions.” Gallarotti (1985) supports her theory of counter‐cyclic protectionism using pre‐ WWI data from Germany, the UK and the USA; McKeown (1984) uses similar data to support his closely‐ related theory. Magee and Young (1987) find that tariffs rise with unemployment using standard regression techniques and data from twentieth‐century American presidential administrations. Bohara and Kaempfer (1991a) use American data from 1890 to 1970. They estimated a VAR that includes: a) the real trade balance; b) the log of unemployment; c) the growth of real GNP; d) inflation; and e) the growth rate of the average tariff on dutiable imports. They conclude that there is significant Granger causality to tariff levels from all variables except the trade balance. Curiously, their impulse response functions have signs that are “sensible” in the very short run (meaning that higher unemployment and lower GDP are associated with higher tariffs), but are reversed within a few years. Bohara and Kaempfer (1991b) use comparable data but with a 3‐variable VAR, excluding the trade balance and inflation. In this context they find no significant effect of unemployment on tariffs, and they also find that higher growth is associated with higher tariffs. A handful of papers use post‐war time‐series data to link protectionism to the state of the macro‐economy. Takacs (1981) uses annual American data between 1949‐1979 on instances when the USITC is petitioned for a temporary tariff, quota or other kind of protection. She finds that the use of the “escape clause” is not correlated with cyclic (or trend) measures of economic activity. Feinberg (2005) finds weak evidence of cyclicality in American anti‐dumping petitions, especially outside steel. Grilli (1988) uses 18 annual observations for both the EC and the USA between 1969 and 1986, and two measures of protectionism, the log of import penetration and petitions for anti‐dumping, subsidy‐ countervailing and safeguard actions. He is able to link these to the log real exchange rate and the growth in industrial production (for the US) or the change in unemployment (for the EC). Grilli uses 2SLS with a Cochrane‐Orcutt procedure, a time trend and dummy variables; he finds evidence of counter‐ cyclic movement in non‐tariff barriers. This is a heavily parameterized approach, long on assumptions and short on sensitivity analysis and data. Knetter and Prusa (2003) find a linkage between antidumping filings and macroeconomic factors. They use multilateral and bilateral data for Australia, Canada, the EU and the USA between 1980 and 1998. Their particular focus is the real exchange rate; they find that appreciation increases filings significantly. They also find that the effect of the three‐year growth in real GDP is insignificant in multilateral data, but significantly negative in bilateral data. Finally, Bown and Crowley (2012) use data for five major economies to estimate the effects of macroeconomic fluctuations on protectionism. They exploit a recent quarterly bilateral data set that is dis‐aggregated by product. While their main focus is on the responsiveness of temporary trade barriers to foreign growth, they find evidence that protection is counter‐cyclic, especially for the United States and Australia. I take the latter two findings seriously and consider anti‐dumping and other temporary trade barriers further below. Still, the evidence of counter‐cyclic postwar protectionism seems less than overwhelming. I start by exploiting the data set tabulated in the data appendix of Magee and Young (1987). This provides series for the natural logarithm of the American tariff and unemployment rates (among other variables), averaged over presidential administrations between 1904 and 1984. I provide time series plots of these series in the top‐left graph of Figure 1. The graph immediately below is a scatter‐ plot of the tariff (on the ordinate) against unemployment (on the abscissa). This shows a positive relationship over the whole period; counter‐cyclic protection. The sample is split into two in the scatter‐ plots to the right. Above, the data show a positive relationship between 1906 and 1942; high unemployment in the 1930s tends to coincide with high tariffs. This relationship is strikingly reversed in the graph below which scatters tariffs against unemployment for the period between 1946 and 1982. 3 Since World War Two, high American unemployment seems to coincide with low American tariffs; protectionism seems to be, if anything, cyclic. This finding is not particularly sensitive. The census bureau provides annual data on American duties (measured as a percentage of dutiable imports) between 1869 and 1997, when the series was discontinued. This can be compared to (the natural logarithm of American) real GNP, taken from the BEA and extended back by Balke and Gordon.3 The raw series on duties and GNP are plotted in the top‐ left graph of Figure 2; NBER recessions are also marked on the GNP plot.4 Both duties and aggregate output trend strongly; accordingly, de‐trended series for both duties and output (after plain‐vanilla double exponential univariate de‐trending) are plotted beneath.5 The scatter‐plots on the right show again that the relationship between the two series seems to be different before and after the end of the Second World War. Before WWII, de‐trended GNP and protectionism are negatively correlated; business cycle upturns tend to coincide with lower protectionism.6 However, as can be seen in the lower‐right scatter‐plot, this relationship is reversed after WWII when business cycle peaks and high duties appear together.7
At the outset of the global financial crisis, the world’s leaders pledged to resist calls to shield their local economies in order to prevent a trade war that could further damage global growth. Four years on, with China slowing, Europe heading into recession and a political environment soured by successive financial crises, the question arises: how long will policymakers be able to resist those calls for more protectionism? “Free trade is going to be under pressure,” said Lowy Institute international economy program director Mark Thirlwell. “Since 2007-08 the case for moving to greater trade liberalisation has got tougher and the demands for protection have increased.” Only last week, China, which is grappling with a slowdown, raised the prospect of a trade war with the European Union in response to the EU's implementation of a carbon emissions tax on air travel to and from Europe. Earlier last month China imposed tariffs up to 21 per cent on US-made cars, affecting about $US4 billion imports a year. Advertisement Across the Pacific, US politicians in the throes of an election year with 8.5 per cent unemployment have issued more strident calls for China to “play by the rules” and allow the yuan to appreciate faster against the US dollar. The US has also asked the World Trade Organisation to probe China's support for its solar panel industry and the restrictions Beijing has placed on US poultry imports. In fact, the most recent WTO data shows that the number of trade restrictive measures enacted by members rose 53 per cent to 339 occurrences over the year to October. Yet the WTO admits that the motives behind the spate of actions aren’t always simply to protect local jobs. “Not all measures categorised as trade restrictive may have been adopted with such an intention,” the body said. In Brazil, for example, the steep rise in the value of its currency, the real, has sparked a torrent of car imports into the country - similar to the online-overseas shopping boom in Australia. Brazil has in turn put a one-year provisional 30 per cent increase on auto imports, to counterbalance the effects of their strong currency. In the US, China and Australia, infrastructure spending measures contain “buy local” requirements to stoke domestic growth, not necessary punish foreign businesses. The federal government in September streamlined its anti-dumping system that eases the way for companies to ask for investigations into imported goods that come in below market value to Australia. Again, well within the rules. “What we’ve seen is a gradual ratcheting up of trade intervention,” said Mr Thirlwell, amounting to what he calls “murky protectionism” or government intervention through support for industries or complaints to global trade authorities. To date, observers such as Mr Thirlwell say most countries have remained remarkably resistant to throwing up significant trade barriers. For example, in November, the US, Australia and seven other Asian-Pacific nations including Japan, outlined the plan for an ambitious multilateral Trans-Pacific Partnership trade block worth 40 per cent of the world’s trade, in an effort to increase the flow of cross-border goods and investment. Japan, China and South Korea are also in the later stages of negotiation over a free trade deal between those three nations. Australian National University international trade lecturer John Tang doesn’t believe the world is on the edge a new round of protectionism. “I don’t see a general sea change towards protectionism for major trading blocks but that may be because so much of the industrialised world is relying on developing countries to sustain their exports,” he said. Nevertheless, a shift in the political reality of the US, China or elsewhere could change that, he said. Washington DC-based Brookings Institution fellow Joshua Meltzer said that if the euro zone broke up, elevating the crisis to a new stage, nations may switch to much more protective measures. ‘‘I wouldn’t go so far to say the global economy is so integrated that we could never have anything that would approach a trade war,” said Washington DC-based Brookings Institution fellow Joshua Meltzer. “But I don’t think we’re on that track.”
However, in the end, he says, "everyone reacts to it. Mines open. Companies stockpile. People try and recycle it or find alternatives, like nanomaterials." China's control is, he believes, "particularly vulnerable" to innovation. So with US government support the Mountain Pass rare-earth mine in California, which is sitting on top of about 13 percent of the world's supply, has just reopened, after closing in 2002 when the price of the elements fell too low. Mines are also starting production in such countries as Australia and Canada. Even once-defunct Cornish tin mines are now reopening thanks to the presence of rare materials such as indium in their tin deposits. In the US the Department of Energy is sponsoring 13 other research projects like Laura Lewis's to find synthetic replacements for rare-earth materials. Professor Lewis says that because rare-earth elements were "messy to dig up and required strong, damaging acids to separate elements from the rocks the world was very happy to have it restricted to China and not in their own country". Now she is under pressure to "invent the material right now" and at the same face the "daunting challenge" of working out how to manufacture the new material before the research has even been finished.
Before the 1990s the US produced enough rare earth elements to meet most of its growing demand, however new regulations, and growing competition from China saw their domestic production decline, and by 2000 the US was entirely reliant on imports, with 94% of the international market supplied by China. But China has restricted supplies in recent years, sending prices soaring by 400% between 2005 and 2011, and creating tension between China and the US, EU, and Japan. The National Resource Council then warned the government that growing demand in China could lead to falling supplies on the global market, which could negatively affect the US manufacturing sector, so, after more than a decade rare earth mines are beginning to reopen. In 2012 Molycorp resumed mining at its Mountain Pass mines in California, and plans to boost production this year to 19,050 tonnes of rare earth oxide a year, enough to meet 10% of global demand.
“The Chinese were able to produce these things cost-effectively, and they didn’t care about their environment,” said Bonfiglio. “[Congress] concluded that we have plenty of rare earth minerals here, so why are we allowing the Chinese to take advantage of us?” Domestically, there is only one company that currently mines and processes rare earth, Molycorp Inc., based in Greenwood Village, Colo. Lanix is planning to open its first mine recovery plant in Yavupai County, Ariz., with development to commence in a matter of weeks. If the measure is signed into law, it could open the door for more companies like Bonfiglio’s to venture into the field of rare earth minerals and create their own processing plants. Bonfiglio entered the field with Lanix Explorations and began the partnership with Rowan in December 2013, inviting university faculty and students to begin studying effective ways to analyze potential rare earth mineral sites, with the hope of eventually creating a processing plant to produce those minerals for commercial use. Students take part in the analysis section of the process, identifying what minerals could potentially be extracted from mining and excavation sites, while also collaborating with Lanix about developing the technology to do so. While most of the process would typically involve employees with a university degree in chemistry, opening up a processing plant in New Jersey once their research is complete could bring manufacturing jobs back to the United States.
MOSCOW — Margarita R. Zobnina, a professor of marketing here, has been watching the Russian economy’s gathering woes with mounting alarm: friends who have moved abroad with no plans to return; others who put off new business ventures because of rising uncertainty. Meanwhile, Ms. Zobnina and her husband, Alexander, also a professor, have rented a safe deposit box to hold foreign cash as a hedge against the declining ruble. Most shocking, she says, is that her local grocery is now selling anchovies packed in sunflower oil rather than olive oil, an obvious response to the soaring cost of imports. “That really freaks me out,” she said. While the annexation of Crimea has rocketed President Vladimir V. Putin’s approval rating to more than 80 percent, it has also contributed to a sobering downturn in Russia’s economy, which was in trouble even before the West imposed sanctions. With inflation rising, growth stagnating, the ruble and stock market plunging, and billions in capital fleeing the country for safety, the economy is teetering on the edge of recession, as the country’s minister of economic development acknowledged on Wednesday. Mr. Putin, who just lavished $50 billion on the Sochi Olympics, also must now absorb the costs of integrating Crimea, which economists and other experts say has its own sickly economy and expensive infrastructure needs. The economic costs have been masked by recent patriotic fervor but could soon haunt the Kremlin, as prices rise, wages stall and consumer confidence erodes. Mr. Horvat said that he had lived in Russia through defaults in 1991, 1993 and 1998 and that he expected another one. “I am not long in Russia,” he said, invoking the financial term for betting on a rising stock, “neither in my portfolio, nor in life.” Given the recent turmoil, a catastrophe has been averted so far largely because the price of oil has remained stubbornly high, at nearly $110 per barrel of Brent crude on Wednesday, even as production steadily rises in the United States. For now, that has kept the federal budget in decent shape with still no deficit projected for the year. But even without a shock, it is not clear how Russia will manage to climb out of the current quagmire. Stagflation is among the most confounding economic problems that policy makers can face, and officials here seem flummoxed, with the Central Bank, Finance Ministry and Economics Ministry urging contradictory steps. Last month, the bank raised its key interest rate to 7 percent from 5.5 percent to combat inflation and support the ruble, a step that could slow growth. Meanwhile, the Economics Ministry, worried about growth, favors borrowing and government spending as a stimulus and to reduce capital flight, a possibly inflationary strategy that is opposed by the Finance Ministry, which wants to keep debt low and reserve funds available to weather any unexpected drop in oil prices. “All of them have their clear priorities, and they stick to their priorities,” said Alexei Deviatov, the chief economist for Uralsib Capital, an investment bank here, “and there is very little coordination between these authorities.” While Russian and global investors and businesses have been moving billions of dollars out of Russia to places perceived as less risky, it is not just money that is fleeing. Ms. Zobnina, who teaches at the Higher School of Economics in Moscow, said that one of her classmates had left for the United States after college 10 years ago, and that another friend followed three years ago to pursue a Ph.D., with no plans to return. Still another friend, a journalist, moved to London last summer with her husband and three children. Ms. Zobnina, 32, said that she and her husband, 30, were thinking about finding posts in Europe or the United States, and for now were keeping their savings in dollars and euros. In an interview, she conceded that putting cash in a safe deposit box hardly amounted to sophisticated financial planning, particularly for two economics professors. “It’s absolutely not rational to prefer safe box than deposit because you lose interest,” she said. “But in this unpredictable situation, when the ruble is falling and banks are unstable — and who knows when we’ll be cut off from the global financial system or which bank will be next to be closed — it’s better to have this small bird in hand.” Even before the Crimean episode, and the resulting imposition of sanctions by the West, Russia’s $2 trillion economy was suffering from stagflation, that toxic mix of stagnant growth and high inflation typically accompanied by a spike in unemployment. In Russia, joblessness remains low, but only because years of population decline have produced a shrunken, inadequate labor force. In recent weeks, international and Russian banks have slashed their growth projections for 2014, with the World Bank saying the economy could shrink by 1.8 percent if the West imposes more sanctions over Ukraine. By some accounts, more than $70 billion in capital has fled the country so far this year and the main stock market index fell by 10 percent in March — and a dizzying 3 percent just on Tuesday over fears of greater Russian involvement in Ukraine. “This is our fee of sorts for conducting an independent foreign policy,” Aleksei L. Kudrin, a former Russian finance minister, said at a recent investor conference in Moscow. He added that the sanctions and the fallout from Mr. Putin’s foreign policy moves would drain hundreds of billions of dollars from the national economy and strangle growth for the remainder of the year. But Mr. Kudrin, who quit his post in a dispute over the Kremlin’s economic policies, said the population had yet to confront the full bill, which he predicted would grow as a result of the steep costs of absorbing Crimea, a geographically isolated peninsula. “Society has not yet seen the final result, and that will be when this puts the brakes on real incomes,” he said. “For now, society accepts this fee.” From a textbook perspective, the deep-rooted ills in Russia’s economy have been clear for years: The decade-long skyrocketing in energy prices that buoyed Mr. Putin’s popularity has flatlined, exposing the country’s dangerous over-reliance on revenues from oil and natural gas. Efforts to diversify into manufacturing, high technology and other sectors have failed, and officials have been unable, or unwilling, to stop the rampant, corrosive corruption that scares off foreign investors.
WESTERN measures against Russia—asset freezes and visa restrictions aimed at people and firms close to Vladimir Putin—may be pinpricks, but the crisis in Ukraine has already taken its toll on Russia’s economy and financial markets. Capital flight in the first three months of 2014 is thought to exceed $60 billion. The stockmarket is down by 20% since the start of the year and the rouble has dropped by 8% against the dollar. Worries about the devaluation feeding through to consumer prices have prompted the central bank to yank up interest rates, from 5.5% at the start of March to 7.5%. The IMF reckons the economy is in recession; this week it cut its growth forecast for 2014 from 1.3% to 0.2%. Despite these upsets, Russia appears to hold strong economic as well as military cards. It provides 24% of the European Union’s gas and 30% of its oil. Its grip on Ukraine’s gas and oil consumption is tighter still. That makes it hard for the West to design sanctions that do not backfire. Russia’s public finances are also much healthier than those of many of the countries against which it is pitted over Ukraine. The budget deficit was 1.3% of GDP last year, whereas it stood at 3.3% for the EU. Government debt amounted to a mere 13% of GDP, compared with 87% in the EU. Among emerging economies, Russia appears to have stout defences to withstand external pressure. New estimates of GDP evaluated at purchasing-power parity exchange rates from the World Bank (see article) show that in 2011 it was the sixth-biggest economy in the world on this measure, only just behind Germany. Thanks to its huge energy exports, Russia’s current account is in surplus, forecast by the IMF to be 2.1% of GDP in 2014. In contrast countries like Turkey and South Africa, which took a battering earlier this year as investors worried about fragile emerging economies, are projected to run deficits of 6.3% and 5.4% respectively. A long history of such surpluses has enabled Russia to amass impressive foreign-exchange reserves, which stood at $486 billion in March. According to the IMF these reserves are four times as high as its external-financing requirement—the rollover of external debt less the current-account balance—in 2014. Turkey’s reserves cover only half of its requirement. Despite these strengths, however, the Russian economy is far from invulnerable. Not all the reserves are available for intervention, since $175 billion are earmarked in two wealth funds which cushion the budget and cover future pension spending. If capital flight continues at its current rate, the central bank will face a harsh choice: it can either expend its reserves to keep the rouble stable or allow the currency to drop, which will add to inflation and could precipitate a domestic banking crisis. The risk posed by capital flight is all the more acute because the economy is already ailing. The long boom that once seemed to justify its inclusion in the BRICs—a group of big, fast-growing emerging economies whose other members were Brazil, China and India—is over. In the decade until the financial crisis of 2008, Russian output raced ahead at an average 7% a year, boosted by surging oil and gas prices. But the recovery after the 2009 recession was less impressive, with growth averaging 4% in 2010-12. Even before the IMF’s gloomy revision, growth had already slowed to a crawl (see chart). While growth has slowed in the past 18 months, inflation has stayed high. Though the falling rouble contributed to the recent rise to 6.9% in March, a more fundamental reason why inflation remains a problem is that the economy is operating at full capacity. The labour market is tight, with the unemployment rate just 5.4%. Russia’s decade of outperformance was possible in part because the preceding collapse after the demise of communism was so extreme. That left ample spare capacity to be brought back into use. Eliminating former wasteful methods of production and applying modern technologies and managerial techniques provided further scope for a sustained burst of rapid catch-up growth.
Rick Stumpf, a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientist, said Detroit's wastewater treatment plant often is cited as a major source of problems. Blooms are not seen in the Detroit River, he said. Adam Rissien, director of agricultural and water policy for the Ohio Environmental Council, said that Thursday's forecast shows that state officials need to regulate the use of farm fertilizer more closely. "Our legislators and administrators need to level the playing field and stop giving the agriculture industry a free pass. First they need to stop the practice of spreading manure on frozen and snow-covered ground," Rissien said in a statement his organization issued Thursday. "Regulators continue to allow farms to spread manure as fertilizer in late fall and winter months onto land that is frozen or snow covered. However, heavy fall and spring rains wash much of the manure off the land and into waterways before it even reaches the soil," he said. Stumpf said that in contrast to algal bloom problems that afflict other parts of the country, such as the red tide in the Gulf of Mexico, the problem in Lake Erie's Western Basin is solvable. Scientists know that if the phosphorus load in Lake Erie is significant reduced, the problem will go away, he said. In contrast, many algal blooms in other parts of the U.S. have natural causes and there's little anyone can do about them, he said.
A team of researchers from the University of Wollongong has led the way in overcoming a demanding environmental challenge by capturing potentially harmful phosphorus from sewage waste and delivering clean water. If released into natural waterways, phosphates can cause harmful algal blooms and low-oxygen conditions that can threaten to kill fish. Meanwhile, there is a high demand for phosphorous for use as an agricultural fertilizer. The UOW research-led team has now designed a system that could help solve both of these problems. It captures phosphorus from sewage waste and delivers clean water using a combined osmosis-distillation process.
DESLEY BLANCH : Australian technology is cleaning up lakes and rivers in more than twenty countries and it’s all due to Grant Douglas, a geochemist who invented a way to control algal blooms which can devastate aquatic ecosystems. London Olympics organisers called on the Phoslock technology to clean up Serpentine Lake in Hyde Park before some swimming events. Dr Grant Douglas had been working on water quality at CSIRO, Australia’s national science agency, for more than ten years when he focused his research on algal blooms, one of the biggest problems that face rural and urban aquatic environments. Phoslock immobilises phosphorus, a major nutrient that drives algal blooms, sources of which come from fertiliser, catchment sediments and sewage. DR GRANT DOUGLAS : Algal blooms I think it’s important to say first off are a natural part of any ecosystem. Before man was around algal cells were blooming or algal was blooming. But really the problem around them is that they have increased in both frequency and magnitude in a range of aquatic systems, lakes and rivers and the like, and that’s primarily due to the increasing amount of nutrients in these systems.
On June 17 the FDA approved New Jersey-based Wyeth Pharmaceutical's Tygacil, primarily intended for skin infections and abdominal wounds. It's especially useful against the common and drug-resistant bacteria Staphylococcus aureus, better known as "staph." But it's a true broad-spectrum drug, applicable against a host of different bacteria - so much so that doctors can feel confident in administering it as a first-line treatment even if they have no idea what germ - or germs - they're up against. Tygacil is the first antibiotic approved in a new class called glycylcyclines, expressly developed to bypass the mechanisms that made bacteria resistant to the tetracycline family of drugs. ¶   The major drawback of Tygacil is that it must be administered intravenously, yet that's also a plus. Perhaps the main reason bugs develop resistance to antibiotics is that doctors overprescribe the drugs. They hand out pills like Pez candy because patients demand it. But patients don't demand IVs; therefore limiting usage of Tygacil and probably greatly forestalling the day when it too leads to resistant strains. But Tygacil is not alone in new and forthcoming antibiotics designed to tell germs: "Resistance is futile!" The injectable Cidecin from Cubist of Lexington, Mass., also targeted at nasty hospital infections, may soon receive FDA approval. Just four days before the approval of Tygacil, the FDA also gave the green light to Pfizer's Zmax, an important new formulation of an older antibiotic. Zmax is administered with merely one dose rather than given over a period of seven to 10 days - an all guns blazing assault on bacteria that cause sinusitis and pneumonia. "An antibiotic taken just once can address compliance issues and may minimize the emergence of antibiotic resistance," Dr. Michael Niederman, Chairman of the Department of Medicine at Winthrop University Hospital in Mineola, New York notes in a Pfizer press release. New Jersey-based Johnson & Johnson has two different broad-spectrum drugs in late-stage testing that are designed to overcome antibiotic resistance, ceftobiprole and doripenem. ¶ The Holy Grail of anti-bacterial drugs is one to which bugs cannot become resistant. One step in that direction may be further development of bacteriophages (Greek for "bacteria eaters".) These are viruses that attach to the bacterial surface and inject their DNA, which replicates until the bacterium explodes. These phages evolve just as bacteria do. The same forces that select for resistant bacteria also select for viruses that overcome that resistance.
A paper by Quan-Guo Zhang and Angus Buckling (2012) takes an experimental evolution approach to begin addressing this issue empirically. In search of a different strategy for curbing the evolution of antibiotic resistance in their experimental populations of the bacterial species Pseudomons flourences, Zhang and Buckling treated their bacterial populations with either antibiotics, a bacteriophage or “phage” (a virus that attacks bacteria), or a combination of the antibiotic and phage. Zhang and Buckling predicted that the combination treatment might be more effective than either antibiotics or phage alone because the combination treatments should better reduce bacterial population sizes and limit their response to selection (Alisky et al. 1998, Chanishvili 2001, Comeau 2007). Additionally, bacterial mutations that confer resistance to antibiotics generally do not also confer resistance to phage, so evolution of resistance to the combination treatments would likely require at least two mutations, and thus require more time to evolve resistance than the other treatments (Chanishvili 2001, Kutateladze 2010).¶ Zhang and Buckling evolved their bacterial populations under the 3 different treatments (in addition to a control in which they allowed the bacterial populations to grow under normal conditions) for 24 days. A total of 24 replicate populations were exposed to each treatment. After 24 days of bacterial evolution none of the replicate populations exposed to control conditions or phage went extinct (Figure 1). In contrast, 12 of the replicate populations exposed to only the antibiotic were extinct while 23 of the populations exposed to combination treatment went extinct (Figure 1). Therefore, the combination treatment was the most effective treatment for killing the bacteria. However, that single population that survived the combination treatment could mean trouble. Intense natural selection, like that imposed by the combination treatment, could have produced a super-strain of the bacteria.¶ Creation of a super-strain, in this case a strain resistant to both the antibiotic and phage with little cost of maintaining such resistance, would be troubling because the antibiotic-phage combination treatment strategy would have only accelerated the arms race rather than curbing it. However, in many cases the evolution of resistance comes with fitness costs, like significantly reduced growth rates in absence of the antibiotic or phage. These fitness costs are thought to stop the spread of some antibiotic resistant strains simply because the strains cannot successful compete with strains in nature when the antibiotic is not present.¶ Zhang and Buckling tested the fitness of their surviving populations in competition with the ancestral bacterial population that represents the starting point for evolution in this experiment. They found that in a short term loans scenario, only the control bacteria increased in fitness relative to the ancestor when competed under control conditions (Figure 2). More importantly, they observed that the fitness of the single surviving population from the combination treatment was less than half of the ancestor’s fitness in the absence of antibiotic and phage (Figure 2). Therefore, the antibiotic plus phage treatment resulted in the extinction of 23 out of 24 bacterial replicate populations, while the lone surviving population was far from being a super-strain.¶ The ability of the surviving bacterial populations to grow under normal conditions was assessed relative to their ancestral bacterial population. Here, any deviation from 0 is indicative of evolutionary change (a change from the ancestor population). Control populations increased in fitness under normal growth conditions, while populations exposed to either phage or antibiotic exhibited reduced fitness. Most importantly, the population that survived the combined treatment of antibiotic and phage evolved greatly reduced fitness under normal conditions (Zhang and Buckling 2012).
But bacteria don’t care. They’re (still) here, they’re (always) evolving, get used to it.¶ I say that because I don’t believe we’re going to be able to keep discovering new classes of antibiotics ad infinitum–although I certainly hope I’m wrong. But if I’m not, it means that we’re only ever going to have so many treatment options, and that the bugs are eventually going to become resistant to all of them (although probably not in our lifetime).¶ What then? And what do we do until then? Let’s start with the first one, since post-apocalyptic scenarios are always fun:¶ Medicine will certainly have to change. Hospitals will become very, very dangerous places (much more than they already are!)… There’s going to be much stronger and urgent pressure to reduce hospital stays and readmissions to the absolute minimum, and most patient care will have to be shifted to community and home settings…. Health systems will have to go through major structural transformations to improve prevention…. GP’s, primary-care specialists, and allied healthcare professionals will become much more important and esteemed members of the healthcare professions…. The notion that individual health is highly interdependent will become a part of popular culture.¶ Funny–apart from the first part about hospitals becoming (more) dangerous, none of these sound all that terrible. In fact, they’re all changes I would very much like to see in my lifetime, bacterial apocalypse or not. It sounds like we would save a lot of lives, avoid a lot of suffering, and spend a lot less money doing it. It certainly makes me wonder why we aren’t doing a lot of those post-apocalyptic things now (i.e. way before the apocalypse.)¶ We should probably also be trying harder to prevent resistance, even if it does happen to be true that it’s battle we will eventually lose. For example, we should make a bigger effort to identify “germ sheds” and bacterial “breeding grounds,” and we should be making an even bigger effort to eliminate them. (One would think that the imperative to eliminate them is an obvious corollary of the imperative to identify them, but we’ve known for a long time that overcrowded prisons are a major source of super-bugs, and yet we still seem quite pleased to have overcrowded prisons proliferating… I guess corollaries just aren’t very popular nowadays.)¶ However, the idea that we will not be able to keep our drugs effective forever suggests that there are certain things we should not be doing in the name of “stewardship.” For example, we should not withhold antibiotics from patients for whom they are currently a life-saving or suffering-ending option simply because doing so might save/help other patients tomorrow. (Again, to me this seems like a line out of “Deep Thoughts by Captain Obvious,” but millions are currently dying from lack of access to antibiotics that are still effective for their conditions, and I suspect that “stewardship” could become a way of justifying that.)¶ To summarize: Antibiotic resistance is a scary thing. Last summer I would probably have lost a loved one due to a ruptured appendix (i.e. due to a failure of early detection, which is part of primary care). Peritonitis is a serious condition even now, but it would most likely have been fatal if the bugs that hit her had been resistant to the antibiotics we have available. I don’t like antibiotic resistance one bit.¶ But at least it serves to remind us that there are better approaches to healthcare that could be realized within our lifetime, and at least it does not give us any reason to deny each other proper care and consideration if we happen to get sick today.
If we lose antibiotics, will we return to a truly pre-antibiotic era? Before considering this question, let’s define what we mean by lose. Although there are now some strains of bacteria that are pan-resistant or resistant to virtually all available antibiotics, these strains are still in the minority. Most disease-causing bacteria remain susceptible to at least a few antibiotics. There even seem to be some bacteria, such as Streptoccus pyogenes (the cause of strep throat and a common cause of wound and bloodstream infections), Chlamydia trachomatis (the cause of a gonorrhea-like infection that can cause infertility and ectopic pregnancy), and Treponema pallidum (the cause of syphilis), that have remained steadfastly susceptible to most antibiotics. ¶ Scientists do not know why this is, and we may be in for some unpleasant surprises in cases like these if these bacterial slow learners finally catch up with the rest of the class, but for now it appears that some serious diseases would still be treatable. Even in the case of bacterial species that are noted for resistance to antibiotics, there are some strains that have remained susceptible to most antibiotics. There may be an important lesson in this. Why would the incidence of resistant strains within a species rise to, say 60% and then level off, leaving 40% of strains persistently susceptible? ¶ This is a phenomenon scientists don’t understand, but such trends have been observed. Instead of focusing exclusively on strains that are becoming resistant to antibiotics, perhaps scientists ought to be paying some attention to those strains that seem not to have gotten onto the resistance bandwagon. In any event, there will probably not be a total loss of antibiotics. This is not to say that the situation will not be grim, but it may not become completely hopeless.
But simply stopping the flood of fake drugs into each country won’t entirely fix the problem, the authors say, because there’s a difference between drugs that are designed to deceive patients and those that are simply poorly made or stored. Creating a so-called falsified medicine, which has little or no active ingredient, can be considered a criminal act. But then there are the drug companies that make mistakes, pills that are stored improperly, mislabeled bottles or sloppy compounding, among other potential errors. “Often, these bad drugs are just poorly made or poorly stored,” Bate said. “If all you do is beef up customs, you’re not going to deal with the legal substandard products on the market.” To catch bad batches of drugs, Bate recommends trying a tactic similar to the international community’s response to fake malaria drugs — setting up strong donor and in-country facilities to test the medicines before they’re sold. “Right now, most TB doctors are just assuming that there’s not a problem with medicines,” he said. “If someone’s not reacting, they keep giving them the drug in hopes it will start working.”
Worldwide, the bulk of antimicrobials administered are not consumed by patients, but rather are given to animals, including cattle, sheep, chicken, and fish, for purposes of food production. Antimicrobials are used: 1. to treat disease in sick animals; 2. prophylactically to avoid disease in animals at high risk; and 3. most controversially as growth promoters in order to raise larger animals for the same amount of animal feed and investment. In addition to their use in animal husbandry, antimicrobial additives are used in companion animals (including pets), plant agriculture (fruits, vegetables, and orchids, etc.), and industrial applications (oil pipelines, industrial paints). The use of immense quantities of antimicrobials in food production and the unintended wide release of antimicrobials into the environment through animal and human sewage and runoff water from agricultural sites has public health consequences, most clearly seen in resistant zoonotic bacteria associated with foodborne disease in humans. Of great concern, though of uncertain qualitative and quantitative import is the potential passage of resistance genes from bacteria of animal origin to human pathogens.
How often have you heard that coral reefs are fragile and would be wiped out by global warming? If you google “fragile coral reefs” (without the quotes) you’ll get 493,000 hits. So imagine my surprise on stumbling on a news report titled, “Marine life flourishes at Bikini Atoll test site.” The report tells us: It was blasted by the largest nuclear weapon ever detonated by the United States but half a century on, Bikini Atoll supports a stunning array of tropical coral, scientists have found. In 1954 the South Pacific atoll was rocked by a 15 megaton hydrogen bomb 1,000 times more powerful than the explosives dropped on Hiroshima. The explosion shook islands more than 100 miles away, generated a wave of heat measuring 99,000ºF and spread mist-like radioactive fallout as far as Japan and Australia. But, much to the surprise of a team of research divers who explored the area, the mile-wide crater left by the detonation has made a remarkable recovery and is now home to a thriving underwater ecosystem. 99,000 degrees Fahrenheit! By comparison the upper-bound estimate for global warming is a puny global temperature increase of 11.5 degrees Fahrenheit (less in the ocean). So even if global warming wipes out life on earth, global warming catastrophists can take comfort that nature will, as it inevitably must, reassert itself. Some, convinced that humanity is the problem, may even welcome such an outcome — no humans, but plenty of nature (over time). [Fifty-four years later at Bikini Atoll, recovery is not complete. Perhaps 28 percent of coral species may still be absent.]
Overfishing, ocean acidification and pollution are pushing coral reefs into oblivion. Each of those forces alone is fully capable of causing the global collapse of coral reefs; together, they assure it. The scientific evidence for this is compelling and unequivocal, but there seems to be a collective reluctance to accept the logical conclusion — that there is no hope of saving the global coral reef ecosystem. What we hear instead is an airbrushed view of the crisis — a view endorsed by coral reef scientists, amplified by environmentalists and accepted by governments. Coral reefs, like rain forests, are a symbol of biodiversity. And, like rain forests, they are portrayed as existentially threatened — but salvageable. The message is: “There is yet hope.” Indeed, this view is echoed in the “consensus statement” of the just-concludedInternational Coral Reef Symposium , which called “on all governments to ensure the future of coral reefs.” It was signed by more than 2,000 scientists, officials and conservationists. This is less a conspiracy than a sort of institutional inertia. Governments don’t want to be blamed for disasters on their watch, conservationists apparently value hope over truth, and scientists often don’t see the reefs for the corals. But by persisting in the false belief that coral reefs have a future, we grossly misallocate the funds needed to cope with the fallout from their collapse. Money isn’t spent to study what to do after the reefs are gone — on what sort of ecosystems will replace coral reefs and what opportunities there will be to nudge these into providing people with food and other useful ecosystem products and services. Nor is money spent to preserve some of the genetic resources of coral reefs by transferring them into systems that are not coral reefs. And money isn’t spent to make the economic structural adjustment that communities and industries that depend on coral reefs urgently need. We have focused too much on the state of the reefs rather than the rate of the processes killing them. Overfishing, ocean acidification and pollution have two features in common. First, they are accelerating. They are growing broadly in line with global economic growth, so they can double in size every couple of decades. Second, they have extreme inertia — there is no real prospect of changing their trajectories in less than 20 to 50 years. In short, these forces are unstoppable and irreversible. And it is these two features — acceleration and inertia — that have blindsided us. Overfishing can bring down reefs because fish are one of the key functional groups that hold reefs together. Detailed forensic studies of the global fish catch by Daniel Pauly’s lab at the University of British Columbia confirm that global fishing pressure is still accelerating even as the global fish catch is declining. Overfishing is already damaging reefs worldwide, and it is set to double and double again over the next few decades. Ocean acidification can also bring down reefs because it affects the corals themselves. Corals can make their calcareous skeletons only within a special range of temperature and acidity of the surrounding seawater. But the oceans are acidifying as they absorb increasing amounts of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Research led by Ove Hoegh-Guldberg of the University of Queensland shows that corals will be pushed outside their temperature-acidity envelope in the next 20 to 30 years, absent effective international action on emissions. We have less of a handle on pollution. We do know that nutrients, particularly nitrogenous ones, are increasing not only in coastal waters but also in the open ocean. This change is accelerating. And we know that coral reefs just can’t survive in nutrient-rich waters. These conditions only encourage the microbes and jellyfish that will replace coral reefs in coastal waters. We can say, though, with somewhat less certainty than for overfishing or ocean acidification that unstoppable pollution will force reefs beyond their survival envelope by midcentury. This is not a story that gives me any pleasure to tell. But it needs to be told urgently and widely because it will be a disaster for the hundreds of millions of people in poor, tropical countries like Indonesia and the Philippines who depend on coral reefs for food. It will also threaten the tourism industry of rich countries with coral reefs, like the United States, Australia and Japan. Countries like Mexico and Thailand will have both their food security and tourism industries badly damaged. And, almost an afterthought, it will be a tragedy for global conservation as hot spots of biodiversity are destroyed. What we will be left with is an algal-dominated hard ocean bottom, as the remains of the limestone reefs slowly break up, with lots of microbial life soaking up the sun’s energy by photosynthesis, few fish but lots of jellyfish grazing on the microbes. It will be slimy and look a lot like the ecosystems of the Precambrian era, which ended more than 500 million years ago and well before fish evolved. Coral reefs will be the first, but certainly not the last, major ecosystem to succumb to the Anthropocene — the new geological epoch now emerging. That is why we need an enormous reallocation of research, government and environmental effort to understand what has happened so we can respond the next time we face a disaster of this magnitude. It will be no bad thing to learn how to do such ecological engineering now.
Macroalgae can lead to virulent diseases in reefs and can release toxins that cause coral bleaching or death. Coral bleaching occurs when a reef becomes stressed and its symbiotic relationship with photosynthetic algae that lives in its tissue breaks down — leaving the white calcium carbonate skeleton visible. Invasive species, including foreign diseases, are another major factor identified by the report that has led to coral reef die-off. An unidentified pathogen during the 1960s and 1970s led to the mass mortality of sea urchins. The disease was likely introduced via foreign boats, as it came as the same time as an increase in shipping and began just miles from the entrance of the Panama Canal, according to the report. The study said tourism could have a negative effect on the reefs when there are not proper environmental protections in place, adding that locations with more visitors and no regulations have less coral cover. Though ocean warming and climate change have played a role in coral reef die-off in other areas of the world, in the Caribbean, researchers found only a weak correlation. But they cautioned that ocean acidification caused by climate change will likely compromise corals in the future. “Even if we could somehow make climate change disappear tomorrow, these reefs would continue their decline,” Jeremy Jackson, lead author of the report and IUCN’s senior adviser on coral reefs, said in a press release. “We must immediately address the grazing problem for the reefs to stand any chance of surviving future climate shifts.”
In almost all regions, heavy tourism seems to be damaging coral reefs. And the big problem here actually isn't from tourists going snorkeling among reefs. Instead, most of the damage comes from sediment and nutrient run-off from hotels, roads, and golf courses, as well as the dredging of harbors to make way for giant yachts and cruise ships. (There are only a few places where coral reefs have thrived despite heavy tourism, such as Bermuda — likely due to strict protections.) Overfishing is another major factor — particularly of the parrotfish. The report notes that coral reefs that have suffered from overfishing are less likely to recover after hurricanes and large storms. The report also mentions two smaller factors. Coastal pollution has increased in countries like Belize, although there hasn't been much work linking pollution to increases in coral disease. What's more, warmer ocean temperatures due to climate change appear to have been a factor in coral bleaching and the spreading of disease in regions like Puerto Rico and the Florida Keys. So far, however, this hasn't been a major factor.
Human impacts, however, including pollution, overfishing of parrot fish, and climate change tip the balance towards erosion, which means the reef habitat could be totally eroded, leaving a flat, barren habitat in its place, the professor added. "People benefit by reefs having a complex structure -- a little like a Manhattan skyline but underwater. Coral reefs provide nooks and crannies for thousands of species and provide the habitat needed to sustain productive reef fisheries. They're also great fun to visit as a snorkeller or diver. "[But] if we carry on the way we have been, the ability of reefs to provide benefits to people will seriously decline," Mumby warned.
“We’re now working at an ecologically meaningful scale with thousands of genetically diverse strains of coral re-deployed in the wild every year,” says Diego Lirman, a marine biologist at the University of Miami. “But we’re realistic—it’s virtually impossible to rescue entire reefs through simple restoration. What we can do is accelerate the reef’s natural recovery processes.” We make a brief stop at the coral nurseries off French Louie Caye, where Carne loads two large plastic tubs with the long, spiky branches of staghorns that she breaks off from the thicket of corals sprouting on their artificial frames. Then we head over to Laughing Bird Caye. Here in the reef-filled waters surrounding the caye—a picture-perfect acre-and-a-half sliver of gleaming white sands, coconut palms, and mangroves, with a cluster of picnic tables where diving and snorkeling expeditions congregate for lunch—the restoration’s results are most evident. Interspersed with the teeming marine life of the reef, next to the boulder-size brain corals, the delicate sea grasses, the fluttery sea fans, and the fire corals, are dozens of colonies of nursery-grown corals: majestic outcroppings of fully grown elkhorns, with leafy branches extending five feet or more, and the massive domes of staghorns, which look like giant mums with their white-tipped tendrils. “Roughly 80 percent of the corals we transplant survive,” says Carne as she sits on the boat deck. Sloshing around in the water-filled plastic tubs, she uses diving weights to break up the staghorn branches into pieces about an inch or two in length. Then we push each of the spiny fragments between strands of rope, seeding the rope’s length with dozens of pieces. They look like giant rock candy necklaces. The ropes are then woven through metal frames sitting on the sea floor. Within the year, they will be overgrown with healthy staghorns, and Carne will come back to break some off and seed it elsewhere on the reef. “We’ve triggered a cascade of destruction with climate change,” says Les Kaufman, a professor of biology at Boston University who specializes in reef restoration. “But by tweaking that system at even a tiny scale, and learning through projects like this about how reefs recover, we might be able to engage their natural healing mechanisms with enormous multiplier effects. That is what we’re hoping the coral nurseries can accomplish.”
Strictly protected areas such as national parks and biological reserves have been more effective at reducing deforestation in the Amazon rainforest than so-called sustainable-use areas that allow for controlled resource extraction, two University of Michigan researchers and their colleagues have found. In addition, protected areas established primarily to safeguard the rights and livelihoods of indigenous people performed especially well in places where deforestation pressures are high. The U-M-led study, which found that all forms of protection successfully limit deforestation, is scheduled for online publication March 11 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.The lead author is Christoph Nolte, a doctoral candidate at the U-M School of Natural Resources and Environment. Co-authors include Arun Agrawal, a professor of natural resources at SNRE.”Perhaps the biggest surprise is the finding that indigenous lands perform the best when it comes to lower deforestation in contexts of high deforestation pressure,” Agrawal said. “Many observers have suggested that granting substantial autonomy and land rights to indigenous people over vast tracts of land in the Amazon will lead to high levels of deforestation because indigenous groups would want to take advantage of the resources at their disposal.”This study shows that — based on current evidence — such fears are misplaced,” he said.Preventing deforestation of rainforests is a goal for conserving biodiversity and, more recently, for reducing carbon emissions in the Brazilian Amazon, which covers an area of nearly 2 million square miles. After making international headlines for historically high Amazon deforestation rates between 2000 and 2005, Brazil achieved radical reductions in deforestation rates in the second half of the past decade. Although part of those reductions were attributed to price declines of agricultural commodities, recent analyses also show that regulatory government policies — including a drastic increase in enforcement activities and the expansion and strengthening of protected-area networks — all contributed significantly to the observed reductions.In their study, the U-M researchers and their colleagues used new remote-sensing-based datasets from 292 protected areas in the Brazilian Amazon, along with a sophisticated statistical analysis, to assess the effectiveness of different types of protected areas. They looked at three categories of protected areas: strictly protected areas, sustainable use areas and indigenous lands. Strictly protected areas — state and national biological stations, biological reserves, and national and state parks — consistently avoided more deforestation than sustainable-use areas, regardless of the level of deforestation pressure.
"One of the simple, but very important, facts is that the rainforests have only been around for between 12,000 and 16,000 years. That sounds like a very long time but, in terms of the history of the earth, it's hardly a pinprick. "Before then, there were hardly any rainforests. They are very young. It is just a big mistake that people are making. "The simple point is that there are now still - despite what humans have done - more rainforests today than there were 12,000 years ago." "This lungs of the earth business is nonsense; the daftest of all theories," Stott adds. "If you want to put forward something which, in a simple sense, shows you what's wrong with all the science they espouse, it's that image of the lungs of the world. "In fact, because the trees fall down and decay, rainforests actually take in slightly more oxygen than they give out. "The idea of them soaking up carbon dioxide and giving out oxygen is a myth. It's only fast-growing young trees that actually take up carbon dioxide," Stott says. "In terms of world systems, the rainforests are basically irrelevant. World weather is governed by the oceans - that great system of ocean atmospherics. "Most things that happen on land are mere blips to the system, basically insignificant," he says. Both scientists say the argument that the cure for cancer could be hidden in a rainforest plant or animal - while plausible - is also based on false science because the sea holds more mysteries of life than the rainforests. And both say fears that man is destroying this raw source of medicine are unfounded because the rainforests are remarkably healthy. "They are just about the healthiest forests in the world. This stuff about them vanishing at an alarming rate is a con based on bad science," Moore says.
Another important fact, according to Sedjo and Clawson, relates to a study done by the Food and Agriculture Organization and U.N. Environmental Programme by J.P. Lanly. Lanly is Forest Coordinator for the UNEP/FAO Tropical Resources Assessment Project and his study "indicates that [of the roughly 7 million acres worldwide per year] the undisturbed or "virgin" broadleaved closed forests have a far lower rate of deforestation than the total, being only 0.27 percent annually as compared with 2.06 percent annually for logged over secondary forest. This figure indicates that deforestation pressure on the more pristine and generally more genetically diverse tropical forests is quite low." Further, "these findings are in sharp contrast to the conventional view that the tropical forests are `disappearing at an alarming rate' and suggest that concerns over the imminent loss of some of the most important residences of the world's diverse genetic base, based on rates of tropical deforestation, are probably grossly exaggerated." (Simon, Rational Readings, p.746) Sedjo and Clawson also said "While the local effects of rapid deforestation may be severe, the evidence does not support the view that either the world or the tropics are experiencing rapid aggregate deforestation. Furthermore, the evidence shows that current rates of deforestation are quite modest in much of the world's virgin tropical forests, for example those of the Amazon; and therefore they are probably in little danger of wholesale destruction in the foreseeable future." (Eco-Sanity, p.90) Sandra Brown, professor of forestry at U. of Illinois and Ariel Lugo, project leader at the U.S. Forest Service's Institute of Tropical Forestry in Puerto Rico also studied available data and "concluded the `dangerous' misinterpretation and exaggeration of the rate of deforestation has become common." As for the amount of deforestation in relation to total forest area, Thomas Lovejoy, then of the World Wildlife Fund, offered a low projection of 50% deforestation between 1980 and 2000 in Latin America and a high of 67%. The source for this was a set of satellite photos taken in 1978 and reported in the Washington Post to show that "as much as one-tenth of the Brazilian Amazon has been razed." But according to Fulbright scholar and ecologist Robert Buschbacher working in Brazil, the Landsat photos "concluded that 1.55 percent of the Brazilian portion of the Amazon has been deforested." "On the basis of this and other evidence, Buschbacher says, `Because of a relatively low percentage of forest clearing and the remarkable capacity of the forest to recover its structure...the threat of turning the Amazon into a wasteland is exaggerated.'
Tropical forests are unlikely to die off as a result of the predicted rise in atmospheric greenhouse gases this century, a new study finds. The analysis refutes previous work that predicted the catastrophic loss of the Amazon rainforest as one of the more startling potential outcomes of climate change. In the most extensive study of its kind1, an international team of scientists simulated the effect of business-as-usual emissions on the amounts of carbon locked up in tropical forests across Amazonia, Central America, Asia and Africa through to 2100. They compared the results from 22 different global climate models teamed with various models of land-surface processes. In all but one simulation, rainforests across the three regions retained their carbon stocks even as atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration increased throughout the century. Robust rainforest The study provides “robust evidence for the resilience of tropical rainforests”, says lead author Chris Huntingford, a climate modeller at the UK’s Centre for Ecology and Hydrology in Wallingford. But uncertainties remain, he adds. For one, it remains difficult to predict how climate will change regionally. Moreover, each global climate model represents climate somewhat differently. The single simulation that predicted biomass loss for the Amazonian and Central American rainforests in the current study used a model called HadCM3, developed by the UK Met Office's Hadley Centre in Exeter. That same model produced the earlier prediction that climate change would lead to massive forest die-off in the Amazon2. Climate scientist Peter Cox at the University of Exeter, UK, was one of the authors on the earlier study and is also involved in the new one. He explains that, unlike other climate models, HadCM3 predicts extreme drying over the Amazon basin in the future, which changes the outcome for the forests there. But in the light of new data and of improved modelling, the drying now seems a lot less probable. Scientists are more confident in the predictions from current studies, he says, as they are based on many more, and much more sophisticated, models. “This has been a big issue in science for many years,” says forest ecologist Daniel Nepstad, who directs the Amazon Environmental Research Institute in San Francisco, “and the emerging view is that there is less sensitivity in tropical forests for climate-driven dieback”.
This conference aims to bring together biological, biogeochemical, and physical oceanographers to discuss the issue of deoxygenation in the world ocean and its implications for ocean productivity, nutrient cycling, carbon cycling, and marine habitats. A serious consequence of global warming that is increasingly gaining importance is the decrease of the dissolved oxygen content of the world ocean. Deoxygenation and extension of the Oxygen Minimum Zones (OMZs) are predicted because oxygen is less soluble in warmer waters and also because the changing oceanic stratification and circulation will reduce the supply of O2 to the ocean interior. However, the biogeochemical contribution due to the O2 consumed by the aerobic processes (e.g. remineralization, nitrification) remains to be quantified. This deoxygenation in subsurface waters will have widespread consequences due to the role O2 plays in the biogeochemical cycling of carbon, nitrogen and other important elements such as P, Fe, Mn, S, etc.. O2 is instrumental to all aerobic life and sublethal and lethal O2 thresholds vary greatly between marine organisms. OMZs are key regions in the climatic gases budgets: O2, CO2, N2O, CH4, halogenous compounds...
Unfortunately, there was little successful inter-jurisdictional coordination in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy. New York City's Office of Emergency Management was theoretically responsible for coordinating the different city agencies. But it was quickly sidelined by the Mayor's Office. The result was a haphazard approach that led to some notable failures with respect to evacuations and the safety of public housing residents. On a larger scale, emergency managers from New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, and Pennsylvania created a Regional Catastrophic Planning Team for precisely this kind of emergency. But when the storm hit, the RCPT’s plans stayed on the shelf, particularly in New York City. As one NYC emergency manager described it to me, "The federal government spent millions of dollars on [the regional plan] and…we did not do anything. All the planning and all the dollars that were spent on regional planning [and] not once did we open the book to say, 'Let's do it this way.'"
It is well known that lethal diseases can have a profound effect on species' population size and structure. However, it is generally accepted that the principal populational effects of disease are acute--that is, short-term. In other words, although a species many suffer substantial loss from the effects of a given highly infectious disease at a given time, the facts indicate that natural populations tend to bounce back after the period of high losses. Thus, disease as a primary cause of extinction seems implausible. However, this is the normal case, where the disease-provoking pathogen and its host have had a long relationship. Ordinarily,  it is not in the pathogens interest to rapidly kill off large numbers of individuals in its host species, because that might imperil its own survival. Disease theorists long ago expressed the idea that pathogens tend to evolve toward a "benign" state of affairs with their hosts, which means in practice that they continue to infect, but tend not to kill (or at least not rapidly). A very good reason for suspecting this to be an accurate view of pathogen-host relationships is that individuals with few or no genetic defenses against a particular pathogen will be maintained within the host population, thus ensuring the pathogen's ultimate survival.
Early warning system analyzes seismic waves to anticipate tremors. Recent devastating earthquakes have spurred research into warning systems that can give people a chance to get to higher ground. But their usefulness is limited not only by the speed at which earthquakes and resulting tsunamis occur, but also by the methods by which warnings are transmited, primarily telephone systems and the Internet. Weir-Jones Engineering Ltd. provides a different kind of early warning system, one that is deployed locally at sites that are susceptible to earthquake damage. In the oil and gas industry, this includes onshore and offshore production facilities and transmission lines, where ground movement can have devastating consequences. According to a USGS report, the 1994 Northridge earthquake in Los Angeles, Calif., caused a gas line to rupture, and the gas was ignited by the ignition system on a nearby truck, causing a massive fire. The government of British Columbia (BC) judged the Weir-Jones system so effective that it elected to install the system on the George Massey Tunnel south of Vancouver to prevent motorists from being trapped beneath the river during an earthquake. Workers place equipment to detect earthquakes near the George Massey Tunnel in Vancouver, BC. (Images courtesy of Weir-Jones Engineering Group) The genesis Founded in 1971, the Weir-Jones Engineering Group specialized in vibration monitoring, running burst tests on line pipe in northern Alberta. “These tests are destructive and only last a few milliseconds, so you don’t get an opportunity to rerun the test if you don’t get the data the first time around,” said Iain Weir-Jones, company president. “The data acquisition systems have to be super-reliable and very quick.” Early on, company personnel took measurements, did some engineering work, and turned the data over to their clients. “Most of what we did was tell people like metallurgists or pipeline designers or chemical engineers what their systems were doing so they could modify them and change process parameters,” he said. “It became apparent that, although our expertise was in collecting information, there were a number of areas where it would be useful to collect information for events in an automated manner.” The goal was to remove the human factor and analyze the data in real time. “We started developing systems which had, for want of a better word, ‘innate’ intelligence,” he explained. Ultimately, the company began developing systems that could monitor vibration patterns and determine whether or not they were threatening. This became the genesis of the earthquake early warning system (EEWS). Instead of monitoring mechanical vibration, the system listens to vibrations in the earth’s subsurface. It works on a premise that is familiar to geophysicists – the time difference between compressional (P) and shear (S) wave arrivals. The system senses the arrival of P waves, which travel faster than S waves and can be indicative of a major quake. “If we pick up the P wave reliably, quantify it, and determine whether it is the precursor of a potentially damaging S wave, then we’ve got a time lead before the arrival of the S wave,” he said. How it works The subsurface is a noisy place, so redundant sensors are needed to validate the P-wave arrival. Typically these sensors are placed about 1 km (0.6 miles) apart. When two or more sensors pick up a P-wave signature, the P-wave arrival is validated. The system then studies the amplitude and frequency of the signature. If the signature is determined to be valid and confirms the incoming S wave will cause damage, the system triggers the alarms that have been put in place. In the case of the Massey Tunnel, warning signs are turned on, and the tunnel is closed until the danger is past. The EEWS also takes into account the design characteristics of the structures being protected. New building codes along the west coast of North America ensure structures can withstand certain ground motion. “The threshold level at a brand new high-rise would not necessarily be the same as a 30-year-old facility,” he said. “We tailor the criteria based on the design characteristics of the structure.” Weir-Jones said that everything from P-wave detection to estimating damage risk takes about one-third of a second and requires no human intervention. He added that a facility 200 km (120 miles) from the epicenter of an earthquake might have only a 15-second window between the P arrival and the S arrival. “You don’t have a huge amount of time, but it’s enough time to shut down compressors, bring elevators to the lobby, close tunnels, and shut off big natural gas pipelines,” he said. Weir-Jones emphasized his systems are not to be confused with regional earthquake warning networks. “The facility-specific systems we are building are hardwired and provide instantaneous response with no lost time,” he said. The George Massey Tunnel is equipped with an earthquake early warning system that will close the tunnel to protect motorists from being trapped under the river. At the reservoir scale Not surprisingly, this type of system also is being used to monitor producing fields. “We’re looking at vibrations caused not by massive earthquakes but by small induced earthquakes, microseismic events, and we’re looking for the energy releases caused by strata movement associated with the depletion of the reservoir,” he said. This is helpful in a number of applications: Delineating production zones; Fracture monitoring; EOR techniques; Heavy oil production-related deformations; Casing deformation; Natural gas storage; Waterflooding; Carbon sequestration; Geothermal reservoirs; and Subsurface waste disposal. Weir-Jones Engineering provided the equipment and supplies for two of the largest permanent passive micro-seismic monitoring systems in the world, for Imperial Oil at Cold Lake, Alberta, and for Canadian Natural Resources in its cyclic steam stimulation field. The company also developed the world’s first integrated microseismic monitoring system using dedicated radio frequency links between a master and multiple slave stations. The system uses GPS-based time referencing for synchronization across the entire system. Other installations have included a multichannel, permanently installed system for continuously monitoring the progress of a COsequestration project and an 800-channel permanent passive microseismic monitoring system in Saudi Arabia. The company also has streamlined its borehole installation, working with Imperial Resources to develop a cost-effective technique for installing custom triaxial packages in deep boreholes using coiled tubing and cement injection and with Encana on a technique to install small-diameter triaxial packages in the annular space between the casing and the wall of the borehole for low-noise installations in producing wells.
MORGANTOWN, W.Va. (AP) — Human activity associated with oil and gas production can sometimes cause earthquakes, but the problem is not hydraulic fracturing, a seismologist from the University of Texas told researchers gathered for a two-day conference on Marcellus shale-gas drilling. When the rare quakes do occur, they're typically linked to the disposal of drilling fluids in underground injection wells, Cliff Frohlich said Monday at West Virginia University. And the vast majority of injection wells don't cause quakes, either, he said. Frohlich cited six earthquakes since 2008 in Texas, Arkansas, Colorado, Ohio and Oklahoma, ranging from magnitude 3.3 to magnitude 5.7. Their locations show that human-caused earthquakes are geographically widespread and geologically diverse, but "very rare," given the amount of petroleum produced and the amount of waste being disposed of. Why some injection wells cause earthquakes and others don't remains unclear, he said. Frohlich hypothesizes that quakes occur when a "suitably oriented" fault lies near an injection site. "Hydraulic fracturing almost never causes true earthquakes," he told the group gathered for the National Research Council workshop. "It is the disposal of fluids that is a concern." Texas has 10,000 injection wells, Frohlich said, and some have been in use since the 1930s. That effectively makes the state a giant research lab for the shale-gas drilling issues now facing Appalachian states including West Virginia, Pennsylvania, Ohio and New York. If injection wells were "hugely dangerous," he said, "we would know." "Texas would be famous as a state that just rocks with major earthquakes," Frohlich said. "That is not true." WVU is hosting the conference through Tuesday for the National Research Council, which is the operating arm of the National Academy of Sciences. WVU Vice President for Research Fred King says the reports that the workshop will generate should be available before the start of West Virginia's legislative session in January and could help guide future regulatory discussions. Frohlich urged policymakers to consider cultural and population differences if they are weighing regulation aimed at minimizing the risk of earthquakes through either the spacing between or monitoring of injection wells. "There's places in West Texas you could have a 5.2 earthquake and it wouldn't bother anyone," he said. "If you're going to operate in urban areas, I think you need to invest in incredibly stringent regulations. But in other areas, you probably don't." WVU Chief of Staff Jay Cole said the university has a special obligation to help industry and government identify critical issues as shale-gas development grows and to identify questions that remain to be answered. The workshop features representatives of industry and government, including the National Energy Technology Laboratory, U.S. Geological Survey and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, as well as researchers from 12 universities. Ray Boswell, technology manager for natural gas technology programs at Morgantown's national lab, said drillers tapping the Marcellus are producing more gas even as they sink fewer wells, and are outpacing production estimates made by the U.S. Energy Information Administration. The region's reserves, he said, can easily sustain strong production through 2040. Joseph Frantz, vice president of engineering for the Texas-based oil and gas producer Range Resources, said technology is allowing drillers to create more efficient operations on smaller physical footprints. Deep horizontal wells today disturb only 1 percent of the surface on a 1,000-acre site, he said, compared with 19 percent disruption with conventional vertical wells set 1,000 feet apart.
Should you decide to take up the study of the Everglades, you may be surprised to learn that the Everglades are not especially diverse in terms of the species it holds. This differs from other ecological hotspots like the Amazon or coral reefs that have thousands of unique species living in them. And while conservation efforts can routinely emphasize the importance of biodiversity in threatened habitats, including the Everglades, the relative lack of diversity might be key to the wetlands’ survival.¶ A familiar benefit linked to a diverse ecosystem is the potential for new knowledge, since nature may already have developed a solution to medical problems that science has failed to solve, or may not even have identified yet. Some of the most promising medical discoveries have come from wildlife in the world’s most endangered habitats. Many of these habitats contain species that cannot be found anywhere else, due to their dependence on the delicate environments where they live.¶ This image is linked to regions such as the Amazon basin, which benefit from a warm, humid climate and, until recently, virtually no human interference. The Everglades were never so lucky, with a subtropical environment relatively few nutrients that mostly arrived through rainfall. The wetlands are dominated by the iconic sawgrass and spikerush that gave the "River of Grass" its name.
Biodiversity may be the buzzword of the day, but there's far more to conservation than sheer numbers of species, say Florida researchers.¶ A report published in the August issue of Conservation Biology suggests that less truly is more in the wetland prairies of the Florida Everglades. Here, the report argues, low biodiversity is intrinsic to the ecosystem's uniqueness and so should be preserved.¶ "The choice of conservation areas solely on biodiversity may systematically bias the process against such habitats," said author of the report Joel Trexler, a scientist at Florida International University in Miami.¶ Generally habitats with low nutrients have low biodiversity, Trexler says. The Everglades have low biodiversity due to low levels of nutrients, which enter the ecosystem primarily from rain.¶ "The Everglades is an ecosystem with fairly low biodiversity in some groups like freshwater fishes, amphibians, and reptiles. There are several reasons for this: the region's recent geologic history, its isolation at the tip of a long peninsula, its low diversity of aquatic habitats, and because of low nutrient levels. "¶ The fact that the Everglades have low nutrient levels makes them particularly susceptible to nutrient pollution, says Trexler. The main source of nutrient pollution there is high-phosphorus runoff from the Everglades Agricultural Area, the northern third of the historic 3,000-square mile marsh that was drained for agriculture in the early 1900s.¶ Everglades¶ The report identifies the naturally low levels of nutrients and the patterns of aquatic plants and animals that thrive under such conditions, as a characteristic quality of the Everglades.¶ "We demonstrated that those patterns are lost when nutrient pollution enters the Everglades. We suggest that these types of ecosystem patterns may be overlooked by criteria commonly used to identify locations worthy of conservation," Trexler said.¶ A specific example of the importance of low nutrients in the Everglades is found in the presence of the dense floating mats of algae called periphyton.¶ Trexler notes that the Everglades has among the highest biomass per unit area of algae (important primary producers) of any ecosystem that has been studied. However, these mats are composed of species that thrive in low-nutrient conditions. The extensive algal mats are a characteristic of the Everglades that contribute to making it a unique ecosystem.¶ "In an unusual twist of textbook ecological patterns, the Everglades has high biomass of primary producers (the periphyton), but unusually low biomass of aquatic invertebrates and fishes that might consume those primary producers. When nutrient pollution enters the ecosystem, the algal mats disappear, but the biomass of aquatic animals actually increases," Trexler said.¶ He points out that aspects of the Everglades that the public would identify as important to conserve, such as rookeries of the wading birds that feed on small fishes and invertebrates, ultimately depend on ecological processes like the delicate balance between periphyton and small aquatic animals that live there.¶ "Decisions about ecosystem conservation must involve consideration of a wider range of characteristics than previously incorporated to avoid overlooking or changing the unique characteristics of such systems," Trexler said.
Invasive species such as the grey squirrel in the UK or the rabbit in Australia have caused untold damage to the native flora and fauna of their new homes. Guam in the South Pacific had a problem so severe that the brown tree snake almost destroyed all local bird populations on the island and Florida has had one particular invasive species that is causing concern.¶ The Burmese python is one of the largest snakes in the world and is indigenous to Southeast Asia. With lengths often over 3.5 metres, it is a formidable predator. While it prefers rodents, it is not averse to attacking animals as large as deer. Despite its reputation (or perhaps because of it), it is quite a popular pet, and when owners have started having problems looking after them they have often been released into the wild.¶ The Florida Everglades National Park offers an ecosystem similar in many ways to the Asian tropical rainforests that would naturally be their homes. This favourable environment has led to a thriving population that studies have shown has placed a significant burden on the biodiversity of the area.¶ A study led by Michael Dorcas, of Davidson College, and published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, has highlighted the main issues caused. Comparing road-kill surveys carried out before 2000 with those done between 2003 and 2011, alarming decreases were seen for some mammals, with bobcat observations decreasing by 87.5%, raccoon and opossum observations decreasing by over 98% and rabbits completely absent from the recent surveys.¶ The surveys also noted that the declines went hand-in-hand with increases in Burmese pythons. Areas without significant populations of the invasive species saw smaller changes in mammal numbers and areas free of pythons saw mammal numbers unchanged from previous surveys.¶ Anecdotal evidence points to similar declines with tourists and local experts reporting severe drops in sightings of small mammals that had previously been abundant in the national park and reports of "nuisance raccoon incidents" vanishing after 2005.¶ The researchers suggested some theories as to why the impact has been so great and it seems that it may be a combination of factors. These might include the foraging grounds of the small mammals being the preferred hunting grounds of the pythons and also the fact that the Everglades National Park had been free of snakes large enough to predate mammals of this size until the recent establishment of breeding populations approximately 11 years ago.¶ There are additional worries that this work did not cover, including the possibility that bird numbers have been similarly affected.
We've written before about "the end of fish." This is the rather apocalyptic warning, promoted by ecologists like Daniel Pauly, that humans are severely over-exploiting the ocean for fish, and, if we're not careful, stocks of key species like tuna will soon collapse. Then it's lumpy jellyfish sandwiches for everyone.
While the disaster response system may be adequate in small-scale disasters when a handful of agencies must coordinate, as I embarked on this research project I became astonished by our nation’s striking lack of preparedness. Disasters often strike with limited or no warning, and by definition they result in large-scale death, destruction, and mass hysteria. They often have long-lasting and large-scale economic, political, and psychological effects. While individual disasters may not be predictable, we can be assured that another disaster will occur in the not too distant future. It may come in the form of a hurricane, earthquake, tsunami, or other natural disaster; or, it may be the result of an intentional human act such as war, terrorism, bioterrorism, or some yet unforeseen destructive act. The American public and political officials have a choice. They can continue, however illogical, to live in denial that another destructive event is forthcoming, or they can learn from the past and finally create a political and bureaucratic system capable of curtailing destructive effects. Despite having responded to thousands of natural disasters and numerous terrorist attacks, at present the United States government at the federal, state, and local levels is exceedingly unprepared to handle the immediate aftereffects of disasters. The federal government has created numerous large bureaucracies and congressional panels as well as generated hundreds of official reports each of which purports to detail appropriate disaster response guidelines. Nonetheless, the improvements since the first disaster response plan was implemented during World War I are not palpable. During the most recent major Hurricanes – Katrina and Rita – despite having significant advanced notice of the impending natural disaster as well as years of investigative reports warning about the fragility of the New Orleans levy system, the disaster response system failed the citizens of Louisiana and the Gulf Coast. That the system requires repair is not debatable. The questions which remain are how the current system came to be, what our expectations of the system should be, and how we ought to shock the political bureaucracy into action to repair the obviously ailing system. Changes to this point have consistently stemmed from the conviction that failure was a result of poor leadership, poor individual decisions, and inexperience. These “improvements” stemmed from the obvious fact that the system would work better if each participating organization were better equipped, better trained, and more highly funded. However, while these shortcomings contribute to the inefficiencies, the consistent failure of the system under different personal leaderships, points to a systemic cause for the failure. Criticism must look at the overall system and the environment in which it functions to develop a practical, appropriate, and affordable strategic plan. The government must replace its tendency to fund “random acts of preparedness1” with a carefully outlined strategic plan that is sensitive to American political traditions, yet still effective
Most Americans, when asked who is to blame for the failed emergency response to Hurricane Katrina, will probably point to the federal government, in general, and to FEMA, in specific. FEMA is to blame for many of the failures; however, the problems are much more systemic and far more widespread than most people realize or care to admit. Most agencies provided many extraordinary services during Hurricane Katrina but failed to deliver others. During the first day of the storm, there was extreme confusion over the situation in New Orleans. Even though the levees were considered vulnerable in a storm of this magnitude, there was limited information about whether or not the levees had actually failed. Local first responders were responsible for surveying the damage and relaying that information to state and federal officials. However, due to equipment damage, personnel shortages, and communication system malfunctions, state and federal officials were unable to ascertain the severity of the situation. All parties knew the situation was bad but there was very little information to suggest just how bad. The White House and the Select Bipartisan Committee reports both comment that the condition of the levees was uncertain during the first day. According to the White House report, at 9:12 a.m. on August 29 there was a report of a break in the levee system. However, the White House later received information indicating that the flooding was caused by water flowing over the top of the levee system and that there was no break. At 6 p.m. the White House was informed that the levee system was not breached, and at 9 p.m. FEMA Director Michael Brown said on national television that the levee system had not been breached. It was not until the next morning that it became clear to federal officials that there were hundreds of breaches in the levee system and that most of New Orleans was under water.75 Only when the severity of the damage was clear, did Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff declare Hurricane Katrina to be an Incident of National Significance. According to the National Response Plan’s Glossary of Terms, an Incident of National Significance is: An actual or potential high-impact event that requires a coordinated and effective response by an appropriate combination of Federal, State, local, tribal, nongovernmental, and/or private-sector entities in order to save lives and minimize damage, and provide the basis for long-term community recovery and mitigation of activities.76 Since there was little doubt, even before the severity of the damage was clear, that Hurricane Katrina would meet this definition, the delay in making this declaration has been widely criticized. In reality, however, even if Secretary Chertoff had made the declaration and a federal coordinating officer had been appointed earlier, it is unlikely that the federal response would have been altered substantially. Even with a federal coordinating officer in place, the federal official still would not have known what assistance the state needed since local first responders were unable to obtain and relay that information.77 Nevertheless, it is possible that the mere declaration of an Incident of National Significance would have increased FEMA’s ability to coordinate with other agencies by raising the profile of the event. In addition to declaring an Incident of National Significance, however, Secretary Chertoff could have declared a Catastrophic Event. A Catastrophic Event is defined in the National Response Plan’s Catastrophic Event Annex as: Any natural or manmade incident, including terrorism, that results in extraordinary levels of mass casualties, damage, or disruption severely affecting the population, infrastructure, environment, economy, national moral, and/or government functions. A catastrophic event could result in sustained national impacts over a prolonged period of time; almost immediately exceeds resources normally available to State, local, tribal, and private-sector authorities in the impacted area; and significantly interrupts governmental operations and emergency services to such an extent that national security could be threatened…78 Of particular importance in a Catastrophic Event is the realization that state and local resources will be completely overwhelmed almost instantly. Such a declaration would have permitted the federal government to preposition supplies in the disaster region. In theory, this would have been extraordinarily important since the federal government is technically not permitted to preposition supplies before an official disaster declaration is requested by the state governor and certified by the president. In reality, however, FEMA ignored this regulation and prepositioned supplies without the required authorizations. Thus, although this extraordinary declaration would have raised the profile of the event and may have led to additional prepositioning of supplies and personnel, it is not clear if it would have significantly altered the federal response.79Following the storm, when officials were finally able to survey the damage, it was concluded that approximately 300,000 homes were destroyed or uninhabitable.80 FEMA, in an attempt to assist these families and others, distributed direct financial assistance to between 1.4 and 1.7 million households.81 This was an extraordinary effort. However, the system for distributing this money was seriously flawed. In an attempt to make the money available as quickly as possible, FEMA distributed 2.5 million debit cards worth $2,000 each to evacuees. However, 900,000 of these cards went to people with fake addresses and $24 million worth of cards were given out without any reasonable accountability.82 In its review of the federal government’s response to Hurricane Katrina, the General Accounting Office noted the need to more carefully balance quick action with appropriate protections against fraud. The GAO cited examples of unduly slow action due to administrative procedures and unjustifiably fast action that resulted in excessive fraud.83
In summary, careful analysis of global hurricane data shows that, against a background of increasing SST, no global trend has yet emerged in the number of tropical storms and hurricanes. Only one region, the North Atlantic, shows a   statistically significant increase, which commenced in 1995. However, a simple attribution of the increase in numbers of storms to a warming SST environment is not supported, because of the lack of a comparable correlation in other ocean basins where SST is also increasing. The observation that increases in North Atlantic hurricane characteristics have occurred simultaneously with a statistically significant positive trend in SST has led to the speculation that the changes in both fields are the result of global warming (3).
More than six years after Hurricane Katrina plowed into New Orleans and the Mississippi River delta, a plan has finally emerged to protect the area from future storms. It relies heavily on the restoration of wetlands to cut down high surges of ocean water like those that flooded the city in 2005—somewhat of a surprise, considering past efforts focused on levees and seawalls.
The science of hurricane protection has evolved significantly over the past decade, fueled by an intensely destructive period of hurricane activity. The decade of 1996 to 2005 was the one of the most destructive decades in the last century with total hurricane damage of $198 billion.
They were beautiful. A row of Monterey Cypress trees that lined a path to the ocean. They provided respite from the winds, a home for birds, shade, and oxygen in exchange for our CO2. They were part of the walking trails at Fort Funston in San Francisco and every time we reached them, the dogs would get excited. They would start vocalizing and surging ahead. They knew. Because the trees, or at least I liked to believe the trees, foretold of what was to come: The ocean was within reach. There was sand to kick up, balls to chase, water to frolic in. I don’t know if the trees meant anything to the dogs, but I loved those trees. And they exist no more. Each and every one was cut down, leaving a row of stumps, an ugly scar on the beautiful seascape of one of San Francisco’s open space treasures. They were not cut down by loggers trying to profit from their timber. They were not cut down to make chairs or tables or copy paper or toilet tissue. They were cut down by so-called “environmentalists.” They were killed by those whose mission was supposed to be their protection. According to the local chapter of the Audubon Society, the trees were not “native” and had to be destroyed. Invasion Biologists believe that certain plants or animals should be valued more than others if they were at a particular location “first.” When the species that were there “first” are competing for habitat with a species that came later, they assert that the latter should be eradicated. In championing such views, the movement paradoxically has embraced the use of traps, poisons, fire, and hunting, even when these cause harm, suffering, and environmental degradation. And the destruction of a beautiful tree lined path to the sea. In Fort Funston, it was not long before the dogs were unwelcome. Before the birds declined in number. Before the plants were ripped out and the rabbits disappeared. What was left was row after row of “caution” tape, telling people to keep out. In San Francisco, on the Channel Islands, all across the United States, plants and animals are being trapped, poisoned, hunted, burned, and destroyed by people who claim the mantel of environmentalism; by groups like the Audubon Society, the Nature Conservancy, and the Sierra Club. And it is getting worse and increasingly violent, both in rhetoric (fish they don’t value are called “missiles with fins”) and in deeds. When Illinois spent $3,000,000 dumping tons of chemicals into Lake Michigan to kill one fish, and ended up killing hundreds of thousands of others, the Natural Resources Defense Council cheered. Even the science writer for the New York Times has weighed in, suggesting mass killing and the eating of animals that do not pass the arbitrary litmus test of worthiness by environmentalists. In a losing battle to return North America to a mythical state that existed before European colonization, they are proposing a slaughter with no end. Is this really what environmentalism should be? And is this the best we can aspire to when we examine what our role should be in relation to the other species of plants and animals who inhabit our planet? To assert that the world must remain as it is today and to act on that assertion by condemning to death those species who threaten that prevailing order, does not reject human interference in the natural world, it reaffirms it. Simply because we are suddenly aware, as never before in our history, that change is occurring and that our presence on Earth has influenced that change, does not mean that suddenly, through that awareness, we can somehow stop it. Nor should we want to. An authentic environmentalism would not advocate that humans seek out and destroy living things for simply obeying the dictates of the natural world, such as migration and natural selection. It would not condone the killing of those plants and animals who find themselves in parts of the world where, for whatever arbitrary reason—be they economic, commercial, or aesthetic—some humans do not want them to be. An authentic environmentalism would recognize that such determinations are not for us to make, because in seeking to undo what nature inevitably does, we merely exacerbate suffering, killing and the destruction of natural places we claim to oppose, with no hope of ever gaining the ends we seek. It is to declare an unending war on nature and our home. When we rip out plants, when we spray toxic herbicides and pesticides, when we poison, electrocute and booby-trap natural habitats to kill those species merely acting in accordance with nature, we not only destroy habitats and beautiful natural places, we put all living creatures, including ourselves, in danger as well. And just as disturbing, we open the floodgates of expression to our darker natures, by teaching others disdain and suspicion of the “foreign” and reverence for the familiar and the “native.” The same forces of nature which created the world we live in today are shaping it even now. They always have, and they always will.   Our actions, and our presence, being as much a part of that system as any other living thing that ever was, will shape and mold how that future will look. That, too, is inevitable. Yet there is no compelling reason to assert that any one outcome would be more preferable than any other. Why is the starling less worthy of life and compassion than the spotted owl? Why does the carp swimming gracefully in a Japanese Zen garden inspire peace and serenity, but when swimming with the same grace and beauty in Lake Michigan, such horror, disdain, and scorn? Because some humans among us say it is so? Because they impact narrow aesthetic or commercial interests? As perhaps the most intelligent and without a doubt the most resourceful species yet to evolve on our planet, humans have a moral obligation to ensure that we use our unique abilities for good, and not harm. We are obligated to consider how our actions impact the other earthlings who share our home. And to determine, with all of our gifts of intellect and compassion, how we can meet our needs in the most generous and considerate means possible. Sadly, as a species, we have yet to comprehensively and collectively determine how we might do this. But that, in truth, is our most solemn duty, and the end every environmentalist should be seeking. On a tiny planet surrounded by the infinite emptiness of space, in a universe in which life is so exceedingly rare as to render every blade of grass, every insect that crawls, and every animal that walks the Earth an exquisite, wondrous rarity, it is breathtakingly myopic, arrogant, and quite simply inaccurate to label any living thing found anywhere on the planet which gave it life as “alien” or “non-native.” There is simply no such thing as an “invasive” species. We must turn our attention away from the futile effort to hold or return our environment to some mythic state of perfection that never existed toward the meaningful goal of ensuring that every life that appears on this Earth is welcomed and respected as the glorious, cosmic miracle it actually is.
When one of the world's worst invasive species, the Argentine ant, showed up along Oak Bay Avenue this summer, it joined a legion of other aliens making themselves comfortable on Vancouver Island. The tiny insects drew attention for their international fame - they now exist on every continent except Antarctica - but there are many more species that don't get as much notice. The Capital Region Invasive Species Partnership, a local branch of the Coastal Invasive Species Committee, has identified 78 invasive plant species alone as priorities. Sixty-six of those have already established themselves in the region, and another 12 species are likely to establish if introduced. In a capital city with an international airport, seaports and plenty of visitors and new migrants each year, controlling the spread of alien species has to happen locally, according to the experts. "Victoria is a gateway to the rest of Vancouver Island - there are lots of entry points," said Rachelle McElroy, executive director of the Coastal ISC, a nonprofit body that works with municipalities across Vancouver Island and the coastal mainland to reduce the impact of invasive species. Being a "garden city" doesn't help: rogue seeds, insects and other organisms make their way in soil packs and other plant material - including both the Argentine ant and the more common European fire ant, notorious for its bite. "We also have a long growing season and such a good climate; plants just want to grow," McElroy said. And the diversity of ecosystems in the area, ranging from freshwater and coastlines to urban areas and rainforests, means many organisms can find a suitable place to stay, according to Gail Wallin, executive director of the Invasive Species Council of B.C. But favourable conditions aren't totally at fault. While some invasive species sneak in undetected on boat hulls and tires, more than 60 per cent have been introduced intentionally, she said. Some plant milk thistle for its healing properties, but fail to prevent the flowers from seeding and spreading, McElroy said. The American bullfrog was introduced by someone harvesting frogs' legs, Wallin said. Scotch broom spread as far as the northwestern B.C. city of Terrace, after a Scot famously planted it on his Sooke farm in 1850. "People want to have a similar garden as they had back home, so they'll bring the seeds over and plant them in the garden," McElroy said. "That sense of home is associated with a lot of these foreign, alien plants.'" Not all invasive species are created equal. The Coastal ISC ranks new species according to their negative impacts. "You want to be looking at negative impacts in terms of environmental, social and economic impact," McElroy said. Giant hogweed, for example, poses a threat to human health. Contact with the plant's sap can lead to third-degree burns. "That creates quite a health hazard if it's in a public park. You don't want kids playing around that," she said. Same goes for the spurge laurel, which she said killed a young girl in Nova Scotia with its toxic berries. And don't let the dainty yellow flowers of tansy ragwort fool you: It can inspire a fatal chemical reaction in horses, cattle and goats if it is accidentally mixed in hay. Other species pose economic threats by damaging crops and property values. Victoria Pest Control supervisor Kurtis Brown said most of the calls his company receives regarding invasive insects concern structural damage. Rats are other common culprits - he referred to them as "probably the world's worst invasive" for their widespread and historical role in damaging food sources. McElroy gave the example of fire ants as insects that cause both economic and social damage. "They bite and sting, they can swarm your legs and they respond to any vibrations. So it basically makes your yard unusable." But most of the damage done by alien species is directed at the natives they compete with. Invasives such as the Argentine ant are known for outcompeting native species, ultimately replacing them. Didymo, or "rock snot," is a species of gelatinous, yellowish-brown algae that first appeared in 1989 on central Vancouver Island. "That's one we see in our streams that can reduce food sources for other fish," McElroy said. Public interest is a powerful thing, and the good news is that it's increasing around invasive species, according to Wallin. Media coverage can help, such as the buzz that surrounded the northern snakehead fish, the quirky amphibious interloper found in Burnaby's Central Park lagoon in 2012. The "Frankenfish" hype resulted in important amendments to the Controlled Alien Invasive Species Regulation, she said, which makes it illegal to bring certain species into the province. New aquatic invasive species, including the snakehead fish and zebra mussels, are now classified as too dangerous. And a new B.C. Prohibited Weed list was published the same year. "There are more legal tools and there's more public awareness," Wallin said. The tricky part, however, is follow-through, according to McElroy. The Weed Control Act, for example, requires land-occupiers to manage noxious weeds on their property. (Noxious weeds, as defined by the act, are typically non-native plants that have been introduced to the province without the insect predators and plant pathogens that help keep them in check in their native habitats.) "By law, if you have an invasive plant that's registered, you have to manage it," she said. "Unfortunately, there isn't much enforcement and that's where municipalities come in." Despite the efforts of co-ordinating bodies such as CRISP and the Coastal ISC, municipal responses to invasive species vary widely, she said. Also, potentially invasive plant species are still legally sold through nurseries, so the best the co-ordinating bodies can do is encourage gardeners to prevent them from reproducing. From Wallin's perspective, however, the biggest difficulty is changing behaviour. "The big challenge, which I think is really critical, is having people be more informed about the actions they're taking so they can take more responsible actions." The Invasive Species Council of B.C.'s strategy focuses on creating responsible habits, rather than tackling specific species. The "clean, drain, dry" method, for example, teaches boaters how to take care of boating equipment in a way that reduces the chance of introducing species like quagga mussels and zebra mussels, which have been destructive in the Great Lakes. "When you tell a class to sneeze in their sleeves, you're not saying, 'Now H1N1 is here,' you're just saying the right behaviour is to sneeze in your sleeve," Wallin said. Others are working to highlight the benefits of native-plant species. The Capital Regional District, for example, offers native-plant gardening workshops, where they introduce participants to both native-and invasive-plant species, teach them how to eradicate the invasives, and discuss the best native species to plant in your garden. "You might live in a rocky outcrop that's dry, but someone else might live on the seashore, so there's quite a range in terms of what's appropriate," said Deborah Walker, demand management coordinator for the parks and environmental-services department. But the overall move, as dictated by the provincial government, is toward targeting the species we still have a chance of fighting. The "Early Detection Rapid Response" strategy focuses on those plant species that have popped their heads, have a high chance of spreading, but haven't yet. The idea is to target species such as knotweed over the already prolific scotch broom. "I think those of us who have been dealing with invasive species over the years, we've gotten smarter and more strategic," said Marilyn Fuchs, regional parks environmental-conservation specialist. Wallin mirrored her thoughts. "We won't ever be able to get rid of all the invasive species," she said. "You cannot chase species-by-species. You have to change the pathways."
I often feel that conservationists are either whole-hearted optimists or doom-and-gloom pessimists about the state of the world. As a steward of our natural heritage, I try to protect the native biota, and although I generally strive to be hopeful, I do encounter species, ecosystems, and topics that threaten my optimism about rare-species protection and habitat management. Ever present and extremely varied, invasive species are the second major threat to worldwide biological diversity after habitat alteration and destruction, and there is no shortage of controversy over their impact and our responsibility (or lack of it) regarding this phenomenon. I stand somewhere between the two entrenched camps representing opposing views—the first, that invasive species are inevitable and to be tolerated; the other, that every effort should be taken to eradicate them. I recognize that certain established invasive species will likely not be eradicated and—yes—that they should even be tolerated. I must balance the cure with the symptoms. The ecology of invasion—the pros and cons of invasive-species management, as well as the evaluation of treatments—is a healthy, if not rigorous, debate, and the books Invasive and Introduced Plants and Animals: Human Perceptions, Attitudes, and Approaches to Management and Encyclopedia of Biological Invasions enter this debate in different ways. Even the basic terminology is part of the discussion. Weed and invasive do not always convey the same origin or impact, and scientists have tried to comply with the politically correct terms of nonindigenous, alien, and nonnative. In Weed Ecology in Natural and Agricultural Systems (2003), Barbara D. Booth and her colleagues made a valiant effort toward terminological neutrality, although, as researchers in agricultural systems, they eventually circled back to “weed” ecology. Judging from the terminology used in these later two books, our changes in perception are reflected in our vocabulary. How to efficiently yet effectively manage invasive plants and animals has been the subject of much research. As a scientist, I avoid a one-strategy-fits-all mentality, but I also bristle at the unsubstantiated criticisms of the applied efforts toward invasive-species eradication. I am not a blind convert to the ivory tower approach to invasion research, but I also know that the spread of misinformation can travel faster than kudzu in North Carolina on a warm day. Although both books are admirable scholarly treatments of this broad topic, editors Ian D. Rotherham and Robert A. Lambert have made the more overt attempt to address alternative views toward invasion ecology. In Invasive and Introduced Plants and Animals, they dissect the subtleties of perceptions and attitudes and examine the approaches by some to control proliferation. Although it is inextricably linked to many ecological issues, the human element is difficult to examine objectively using traditional scientific methods. Therefore, I also admire the Herculean efforts of Rotherham and Lambert to cover the subjective aspects of the issue in their book. In a particular graduate course, I once learned about conservation without any direct discussion of specific species. The concept was discussed, instead, using world economic theory, anthropology, and human culture. This approach broadened my perspective of the issue, and I am reminded of this in the way that Rotherham and Lambert address the concept of invasive species. They argue that invasion ecology research and the actions toward invasive species are based on human bias and perception. It is sobering to be reminded that what is considered an “acceptable” species continues to change over the years. According to Rotherham and Lambert, invasive species “will have increasingly important roles and functions in future landscapes.” This is the concept of recombinant ecology, a slowly growing viewpoint in European ecology, and specialists in the field as well as resource managers facing invasions should read this material.
TEACH A MAN TO FISH -- THEN WHAT?¶ Another cause of the oceans’ decline is that humans are simply killing and eating too many fish. A frequently cited 2003 study in the journal Nature by the marine biologists Ransom Myers and Boris Worm found that the number of large fish -- both open-ocean species, such as tuna, swordfish, and marlin, and large groundfish, such as cod, halibut, and flounder -- had declined by 90 percent since 1950. The finding provoked controversy among some scientists and fishery managers. But subsequent studies have confirmed that fish populations have indeed fallen dramatically.¶ In fact, if one looks back further than 1950, the 90 percent figure turns out to be conservative. As historical ecologists have shown, we are far removed from the days when Christopher Columbus reported seeing large numbers of sea turtles migrating off the coast of the New World, when 15-foot sturgeon bursting with caviar leaped from the waters of the Chesapeake Bay, when George Washington’s Continental army could avoid starvation by feasting on swarms of shad swimming upriver to spawn, when dense oyster beds nearly blocked the mouth of the Hudson River, and when the early-twentieth-century American adventure writer Zane Grey marveled at the enormous swordfish, tuna, wahoo, and grouper he found in the Gulf of California.¶ Today, the human appetite has nearly wiped those populations out. It’s no wonder that stocks of large predator fish are rapidly dwindling when one considers the fact that one bluefin tuna can go for hundreds of thousands of dollars at market in Japan. High prices -- in January 2013, a 489-pound Pacific bluefin tuna sold for $1.7 million at auction in Tokyo -- make it profitable to employ airplanes and helicopters to scan the ocean for the fish that remain; against such technologies, marine animals don’t stand a chance.¶ Nor are big fish the only ones that are threatened. In area after area, once the long-lived predatory species, such as tuna and swordfish, disappear, fishing fleets move on to smaller, plankton-eating fish, such as sardines, anchovy, and herring. The overexploitation of smaller fish deprives the larger wild fish that remain of their food; aquatic mammals and sea birds, such as ospreys and eagles, also go hungry. Marine scientists refer to this sequential process as fishing down the food chain.¶ The problem is not just that we eat too much seafood; it’s also how we catch it. Modern industrial fishing fleets drag lines with thousands of hooks miles behind a vessel, and industrial trawlers on the high seas drop nets thousands of feet below the sea’s surface. In the process, many untargeted species, including sea turtles, dolphins, whales, and large sea birds (such as albatross) get accidentally captured or entangled. Millions of tons of unwanted sea life is killed or injured in commercial fishing operations each year; indeed, as much as a third of what fishermen pull out of the waters was never meant to be harvested. Some of the most destructive fisheries discard 80 to 90 percent of what they bring in. In the Gulf of Mexico, for example, for every pound of shrimp caught by a trawler, over three pounds of marine life is thrown away.
Off the coast of Svalbard methane gas flares originating from gas hydrate deposits at depth of several hundred metres have been observed regularly. A new study conducted by an international team under the leadership of scientists from GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel and MARUM -- Center for Marine Environmental Sciences in Bremen shows, that the observed outgassing is most likely caused by natural processes and can not be attributed to global warming.
A new weather satellite slated to be launched Thursday in Japan will take unprecedented three-dimensional views of rainstorms and hurricanes. It also will capture — for the first time by a satellite — views of falling snow.
There’s an interesting study out on the natural pH changes in the ocean. I discussed some of these pH changes a year ago in my post “The Electric Oceanic Acid Test“. Before getting to the new study, let me say a couple of things about pH.¶ The pH scale measures from zero to fourteen. Seven is neutral, because it is the pH of pure water. Below seven is acidic. Above seven is basic. This is somewhat inaccurately but commonly called “alkaline”. Milk is slightly acidic. Baking soda is slightly basic (alkaline).¶ The first thing of note regarding pH is that alkalinity is harder on living things than is acidity. Both are corrosive of living tissue, but alkalinity has a stronger effect. It seems counterintuitive, but it’s true. For example, almost all of our foods are acidic. We eat things with a pH of 2, five units below the neutral reading of 7 … but nothing with a corresponding pH of 12, five units above neutral. The most alkaline foods are eggs (pH up to 8) and dates and crackers (pH up to 8.5). Heck, our stomach acid has a pH of 1.5 to 3.0, and our bodies don’t mind that at all … but don’t try to drink Drano, the lye will destroy your stomach.¶ That’s why when you want to get rid of an inconvenient body, you put lye on it, not acid. It’s also why ocean fish often have a thick mucus layer over their skin, inter alia to protect them from the alkalinity. Acidity is no problem for life compared to alkalinity.¶   Next, a question of terminology. When a base is combined with an acid, for example putting baking soda on spilled car battery acid, that is called “neutralizing” the acid. This is because it is moving towards neutral. Yes, it increases the pH, but despite that, it is called “neutralizing”, not “alkalizing”.¶ This same terminology is used when measuring pH. In a process called “titration”, you measure how much acid it takes to neutralize an unknown basic solution. If you add too much acid, the pH drops below 7.0 and the mixture becomes acidic. Add too little acid, and the mixture remains basic. Your goal in titration is to add just enough acid to neutralize the basic solution. Then you can tell how alkaline it was, by the amount of acid that it took to neutralize the basic solution.¶ Similarly, when rainwater (slightly acidic) falls on the ocean (slightly basic), it has a neutralizing effect on the slightly alkaline ocean. Rainwater slightly decreases the pH of the ocean. Despite that, we don’t normally say that rainwater is “acidifying” the ocean. Instead, because it is moving the ocean towards neutral, we say it is neutralizing the ocean.¶ The problem with using the term “acidify” for what rainwater does to the ocean is that people misunderstand what is happening. Sure, a hard-core scientist hearing “acidify” might think “decreasing pH”. But most people think “Ooooh, acid, bad, burns the skin.” It leads people to say things like the following gem that I came across yesterday:¶ Rapid increases in CO2 (such as today) overload the system, causing surface waters to become corrosive.¶  In reality, it’s quite the opposite. The increase in CO2 is making the ocean, not more corrosive, but more neutral. Since both alkalinity and acidity corrode things, the truth is that rainwater (or more CO2) will make the ocean slightly less corrosive, by marginally neutralizing its slight alkalinity. That is the problem with the term “acidify”, and it is why I use and insist on the more accurate term “neutralize”. Using “acidify”, is both alarmist and incorrect. The ocean is not getting acidified by additional CO2. It is getting neutralized by additional CO2.¶   With that as prologue, let me go on to discuss the paper on oceanic pH.¶ The paper is called “High-Frequency Dynamics of Ocean pH: A Multi-Ecosystem Comparison” (hereinafter pH2011). As the name suggests, they took a look at the actual variations of pH in a host of different parts of the ocean. They show 30-day “snapshots” of a variety of ecosystems. The authors comment:¶ These biome-specific pH signatures disclose current levels of exposure to both high and low dissolved CO2, often demonstrating that resident organisms are already experiencing pH regimes that are not predicted until 2100.¶ First, they show the 30-day snapshot of both the open ocean and a deepwater open ocean reef:¶ I note that even in the open ocean, the pH is not constant, but varies by a bit over the thirty days. These changes are quite short, and are likely related to rainfall events during the month. As mentioned above, these slightly (and temporarily) neutralize the ocean surface, and over time mix in to the lower waters. Over Kingman reef, there are longer lasting small swings.¶ Compare the two regions shown in Fig. 1 to some other coral reef “snapshots” of thirty days worth of continuous pH measurements.¶ There are a couple of things of note in Figure 3. First, day-to-night variations in pH are from the CO2 that is produced by the reef life as a whole. Also, day-to-night swings on the Palmyra reef terrace are about a quarter of a pH unit … which is about 60% more than the projected change from CO2 by the year 2100.¶ Moving on, we have the situation in a couple of upwelling areas off of the California coast:¶ Here we see even greater swings of pH, much larger than the possible predicted change from CO2. Remember that this is only over the period of a month, so there will likely be an annual component to the variation as well.¶ Again we see a variety of swings of pH, both long- and short-term. Inshore, we find even larger swings, as shown in Figure 6.¶ Again we see large pH changes in a very short period of time, both in the estuary and the near-shore area.¶ My conclusions from all of this?¶ First, there are a number of places in the ocean where the pH swings are both rapid and large. The life in those parts of the ocean doesn’t seem to be bothered by either the size or the speed these swings.¶   Second, the size of the possible pH change by 2100 is not large compared to the natural swings.¶ Third, due to a host of buffering mechanisms in the ocean, the possible pH change by 2100 may be smaller, but is unlikely to be larger, than the forecast estimate shown above.¶ Fourth, I would be very surprised if we’re still burning much fossil fuel ninety years from now. Possible, but doubtful in my book. So from this effect as well, the change in oceanic pH may well be less than shown above.¶ Fifth, as the authors commented, some parts of the ocean are already experiencing conditions that were not forecast to arrive until 2100 … and are doing so with no ill effects.¶ As a result, I’m not particularly concerned about a small change in oceanic pH from the change in atmospheric CO2. The ocean will adapt, some creatures’ ranges will change a bit, some species will be slightly advantaged and others slightly disadvantaged. But CO2 has been high before this. Overall, making the ocean slightly more neutral will likely be beneficial to life, which doesn’t like alkalinity but doesn’t mind acidity at all.
The world's climate alarmists would have us believe that they know all they need to know about earth's climate system and its biological ramifications to justify an unbelievably expensive and radical restructuring of the way the industrialized world both obtains and utilizes energy. But is this really so?¶ In an eye-opening "perspective" article published a couple of years ago in the 9 December 2009 issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, three researchers from the Marine Biogeochemistry Section of the Leibniz Institute of Marine Sciences in Kiel, Germany, describe their assessment of various possible responses of the global ocean's seawater carbonate system, plus its physical and biological carbon pumps, to ocean warming and associated changes in vertical mixing and overturning circulation, as well as the closely-allied phenomena of ocean acidification and carbonation.¶ All of these phenomena, many of which are nonlinear and extremely complicated, are interlinked; and Riebesell and his colleagues thus conclude, from their objective review of the pertinent scientific literature, that the magnitude and even the sign of the global ocean's carbon cycle feedback to climate change are, in their words, "yet unknown."¶   They note, for example, that "our understanding of biological responses to ocean change is still in its infancy." With respect to ocean acidification, in particular, they write that the impact it will have on marine life "is still uncertain," and that the phenomenon itself is but "one side of the story," the other side being what they call "ocean carbonation," which, as they describe it, "will likely be beneficial to some groups of photosynthetic organisms." Thus, they write that "our present understanding of biologically driven feedback mechanisms is still rudimentary," and that with respect to many of their magnitudes, "our understanding is too immature to even make a guess." What is more, they imply that even what we do think we know could well be wrong, because, as they elucidate, "our present knowledge of pH/CO2 sensitivities of marine organisms is based almost entirely on short-term perturbation experiments, neglecting the possibility of evolutionary adaptation."
Alarming fears about unrealistic ocean pH’s¶ “Some ocean pH’s studied were so extreme they are only seen on Star Trek”¶ Studies of how marine life copes with less alkaline conditions include many experiments with water at pH values in a range beyond anything that is likely on planet Earth — they go beyond the bounds of what’s possible. There are estimates that the pH of the ocean has shifted about 0.1 pH unit in the last 200 years, yet some studies consider the effects of water that is shifted by 2 or even 4 entire pH units. Four pH units means 10,000 fold change in the concentration of hydrogen ions). That’s a shift so large, it’s not going to occur in the next few thousand years, even under the worst of the worst case scenarios by the most sadistic models. Indeed, it’s virtually impossible for CO2 levels to rise high enough to effect that kind of change, even if we burned every last fossil, every tree, plant microbe, and vaporized life on earth. (Yet still someone thought it was worth studying what would happen if, hypothetically, that happened. Hmm.)¶ 1103 studies on acidification say there’s no need to panic¶ CO2 science has an extraordinary data base of 1103 studies of the effects of “acidification” on marine life. They reason that any change beyond 0.5 pH units is “far far beyond the realms of reality” even if you are concerned about coral reefs in the year 2300 (see Tans 2009). Even the IPCC’s highest end “scenario A2″ estimate predicts a peak change in the range of 0.6 units by 2300.¶ Many of the headlines forecasting “Death to Reefs” come from studies of ocean water at extreme pH’s that will never occur globally, and that are beyond even what the IPCC is forecasting. Some headlines come from studies of hydrothermal vents where CO2 bubbles up from the ocean floor. Not surprisingly they find changes to marine life near the vents, but then, the pH of these areas ranges right down to 2.8. They are an extreme environment, nothing like what we might expect to convert the worlds oceans too.¶   Marine life, quite happy about a bit more CO2?¶ Studies of growth, calcification, metabolism, fertility and survival show that, actually, if things were a little less alkaline, on average, marine life would benefit. There will be winners and losers, but on the whole, using those five measures of health, the reefs are more likely to have more life on and around them, than they are to shrink.¶   Studies of acidification of marine life in oceans calcification, growth, survival,¶ Figure 12. Percent change in the five measured life characteristics (calcification, metabolism, growth, fertility and survival) vs. decline of seawater pH from its present (control treatment) value to ending values extending up to the beginning pH value of "the warped world of the IPCC" for all individual data points falling within this pH decline range.¶ How can this be?¶ First, marine life evolved under conditions were most of the time the world was warmer and had more CO2 in the atmosphere than it does today. Second, like life above the water, life-below-water is based on carbon, and putting more carbon into the water is not necessarily a bad thing. That said, the dots in the graph above represent study results, and the ones below zero tell us there will be some losers, even though there will be more winners (above zer0). Thirdly, watch out for some of the more devastating headlines which also come from studies where researchers changed the pH by tossing hydrochloric acid into the tank. Chlorine, as they say, is not the same as the gas nature breathes — CO2. (The strange thing about the studies with hydrochloric acid, is that it doesn’t seem to be bad as we might have expected– nonetheless, it seems like a dubious practice to use in studying the health of corals.)¶ The bottom line:¶ Yes, we should watch and monitor the oceans careful. No, there is no chance the Great Barrier Reef will be gone in the next 100 years: 1103 studies show that if the worlds oceans were slightly less basic then marine life as a whole will be slightly more likely to grow, survive, and be fertile.¶   That doesn’t mean we should torch coal seams for the fun of it, but it does mean we can afford to hold off on the oceanic panic for a century or so while we figure out how to make solar and wind power work ( in the event that we might need them, and in the event that they might “work”).
With global temperatures continuing their decade-long decline and United Nations-sponsored global warming talks falling apart in Copenhagen, alarmists at the U.N. talks spent considerable time claiming carbon dioxide emissions will cause catastrophic ocean acidification, regardless of whether temperatures rise.¶ The latest scientific data, however, show no such catastrophe is likely to occur.¶   Food Supply Risk Claimed¶ The United Kingdom’s environment secretary, Hilary Benn, initiated the Copenhagen ocean scare with a high-profile speech and numerous media interviews claiming ocean acidification threatens the world’s food supply.¶ “The fact is our seas absorb CO2. They absorb about a quarter of the total that we produce, but it is making our seas more acidic,” said Benn in his speech. “If this continues as a problem, then it can affect the one billion people who depend on fish as their principle source of protein, and we have to feed another 2½ to 3 billion people over the next 40 to 50 years.”¶ Benn’s claim of oceans becoming “more acidic” is misleading, however. Water with a pH of 7.0 is considered neutral. pH values lower than 7.0 are considered acidic, while those higher than 7.0 are considered alkaline. The world’s oceans have a pH of 8.1, making them alkaline, not acidic. Increasing carbon dioxide concentrations would make the oceans less alkaline but not acidic.¶   Since human industrial activity first began emitting carbon dioxide into the atmosphere a little more than 200 years ago, the pH of the oceans has fallen merely 0.1, from 8.2 to 8.1.¶   Following Benn’s December 14 speech and public relations efforts, most of the world’s major media outlets produced stories claiming ocean acidification is threatening the world’s marine life. An Associated Press headline, for example, went so far as to call ocean acidification the “evil twin” of climate change.¶ Studies Show CO2 Benefits¶ Numerous recent scientific studies show higher carbon dioxide levels in the world’s oceans have the same beneficial effect on marine life as higher levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide have on terrestrial plant life.¶   In a 2005 study published in the Journal of Geophysical Research, scientists examined trends in chlorophyll concentrations, critical building blocks in the oceanic food chain. The French and American scientists reported “an overall increase of the world ocean average chlorophyll concentration by about 22 percent” during the prior two decades of increasing carbon dioxide concentrations.¶   In a 2006 study published in Global Change Biology, scientists observed higher CO2 levels are correlated with better growth conditions for oceanic life. The highest CO2 concentrations produced “higher growth rates and biomass yields” than the lower CO2 conditions.¶  Higher CO2 levels may well fuel “subsequent primary production, phytoplankton blooms, and sustaining oceanic food-webs,” the study concluded.¶ Ocean Life ‘Surprisingly Resilient’¶ In a 2008 study published in Biogeosciences, scientists subjected marine organisms to varying concentrations of CO2, including abrupt changes of CO2 concentration. The ecosystems were “surprisingly resilient” to changes in atmospheric CO2, and “the ecosystem composition, bacterial and phytoplankton abundances and productivity, grazing rates and total grazer abundance and reproduction were not significantly affected by CO2-induced effects.”¶   In a 2009 study published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, scientists reported, “Sea star growth and feeding rates increased with water temperature from 5ºC to 21ºC. A doubling of current [CO2] also increased growth rates both with and without a concurrent temperature increase from 12ºC to 15ºC.”¶ Another False CO2 Scare¶ “Far too many predictions of CO2-induced catastrophes are treated by alarmists as sure to occur, when real-world observations show these doomsday scenarios to be highly unlikely or even virtual impossibilities,” said Craig Idso, Ph.D., author of the 2009 book CO2, Global Warming and Coral Reefs. “The phenomenon of CO2-induced ocean acidification appears to be no different.¶ “What we observe in nature is not supported by theoretical projections, because numerous studies have shown that the net impact of twentieth century increases in atmospheric CO2 and temperature has not been anywhere near as catastrophically disruptive to Earth’s marine organisms as climate alarmists suggest it should have been. And every month more and more research confirms that marine life will likely successfully adapt to, or even benefit from, the modest increase in atmospheric CO2 and temperature projected to occur in the future,” Idso explained.¶ “As for why this is the way marine organisms respond, no one knows for certain, but it is probably because calcification is a biologically driven process that can overcome physical-chemical limitations which in the absence of life would appear to be insurmountable,” Idso said. “We have got to realize that rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations are not the bane of the biosphere but an invaluable boon to the planet’s many life forms, marine life included.”
WASHINGTON — Fish populations off America's coasts continued to rebound last year, a trend government officials attribute largely to widening catch limits and other scientific management methods. Red snapper in the Gulf of Mexico, yellowtail flounder off southern New England and the Mid-Atlantic, and coho salmon in the Pacific Northwest were among stocks upgraded by the government based on fish counts that showed significant growth in 2012. The report on the status of improving stocks was issued Thursday by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which monitors fish populations in federal waters between three and 200 miles off the U.S. coast.
Many of the major European fish stocks in the northeast Atlantic are now being fished sustainably and, given time, should continue to recover, according to a new report. The findings, published in Current Biology, may come as surprisingly good news amid widespread criticism that the European Union's Common Fisheries Policy is failing, said the researchers behind the study. "Contrary to common perception, the status of our fish stocks is improving," explained Paul Fernandes of the University of Aberdeen, Scotland. "Many of our stocks are not overfished; nature now needs to take its course for these fish to rebuild their populations." However, Robin Cook from the University of Strathclyde, Scotland, added that industry and policy makers should still be aware that low fishing pressures need to be maintained until stocks recover. "This is only the first step," said Cook. "Now we need to see numbers increase as a result of continued low fishing pressure."
Fish stock exploitation levels decline December 20, 2013 / News Exploitation of fish stocks in the Northeast Atlantic has significantly declined over the last ten years. This is the conclusion of scientists at the annual meeting of the International Council for the Exploration of the Seas (ICES) Advisory Committee (ACOM), held this month in Copenhagen. ACOM supplies scientific advice on coastal and ocean management. They analysed historical trends for 85 fish stocks in the Northeast Atlantic since 1960, looking at factors like fishing pressure (how many fish are removed by fishing) and stock size. The scientists found fish stocks have begun to recover over the last ten years and there has been less fishing pressure. By reducing fishing pressure in the short term, fish populations are more likely to recover to higher levels which can lead to higher profitability in the long run. The declines in fishing pressure may have stemmed from increasing fuel costs, changing markets or reductions in catch limits. Improving stocks The report shows cod stocks have improved in the Baltic Sea, the Barents Sea and the seas around Iceland. Herring in the Baltic, the North Sea and the Norwegian Sea have also started to improve and are being harvested in line with targets set by policy makers. However, these improvements are not universal for all fish stocks. Fishing pressure may be decreasing on average, but ICES still advises that catches of some stocks should be minimised.
Most fish stocks are no longer in crisis and should return to healthy levels if current fishing quotas are maintained, scientists have said. Researchers at the universities of Aberdeen and Strathclyde found that the general trend in fish populations was better now that at any time since the 1960s. Some species, notably cod, were still being over-exploited, but the study concluded that the European Union's Common Fisheries Policy appeared to be working. "Contrary to common perception, the status of our fish stocks is improving," said Dr Paul Fernandes, of the University of Aberdeen, who co-led the study. "Many of our stocks are not over-fished; nature now needs to take its course for these fish to rebuild their populations." The scientists analysed data on millions of fish collected both from fishing and research vessels, and fish markets. More than 60% of fish stocks in an area covering the Atlantic shelf and North, Baltic and Celtic seas were now being fished sustainably. The researchers said they were surprised by the number of stocks that had improved since fishing pressure was reduced at the start of the 21st century. Co-author Dr Robin Cook, from the University of Strathclyde, said: "We should be aware that low fishing pressure needs to be maintained until stocks recover. "This is only the first step. Now we need to see numbers increase as a result of continued low fishing pressure."
“The fisherfolk can catch as much as 20 kilos of galunggong per fishing trip using simple and sustainable fishing gear. And the bounty is enjoyed by the communities who are able to buy galunggong for P 40 per kilo in Puerto Princesa which is very low compared to the P 100 per kilo of galunggong sold in Metro Manila. Imagine the huge displacement this proposal would bring to the fisher people and ordinary folks of Palawan and Region IV-A of Southern Tagalog,” Pamalakaya and Anakpawis partylist added. The DA and BFAR officials argued that the proposed ban would be an offshoot of the fish ban the agencies imposed last year in Zamboanga Peninsula for sardines. They said the ban on fishing sardines last year resulted to increase of commercial fisheries caught with 228,303 metric tons (MT) of sardines in the first quarter of 2013, which is 5 percent higher than the 217,431 MT caught in the same period the year before. Alcala said the closed season on catching galunggong would help expand current stocks and reduce imports in the long run. If implemented, the ban would cover the fish-rich Malampaya Sound and some municipalities in Palawan, including Quezon town.
A record six populations of fish returned to healthy levels in 2011, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reported to Congress on Monday. NOAA’s Fisheries Service said the count showed that controversial and often unpopular catch limits imposed by the government have been working. Among the rebuilt populations are the Bering Sea snow crab, the summer flounder on the mid-Atlantic coast, the haddock in the Gulf of Maine, the Chinook salmon along the Northern California coast, the coho salmon off Washington State and the Pacific widow rockfish, the Fisheries Service said. Under the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act, NOAA must report annually on the state of fish stocks in waters within 200 miles of the coast, and depleted stocks must be rebuilt to healthy levels. Scores of fish species have been in serious decline since the 1980s, largely because of overfishing. Altogether, 27 fish stocks have been returned to health in the last 11 years, the agency said. Lee Crockett, director of federal fisheries policy for the Pew Environmental Group, called the report’s findings encouraging. “It is a demonstration that the sacrifices are showing results,” he said. NOAA said there were other signs that overall fish stocks were improving. In 2011, 79 percent of fish populations assessed – 174 of 219 – were not overfished or were above levels that would require a program to restore them to health, up from 77 percent the previous year, it reported. When a fish stock is assessed at a healthy level, fishermen are allowed to increase their catch, but in many cases only to a degree. Given that fishermen often find the catch limits financially burdensome, a push is under way in Congress to amend the Magnuson-Stevens act to allow more exemptions from catch limits Mr. Crockett contends that it is far too soon to soften the law, which was passed in 1976 and has twice been amended To be deemed rebuilt, fish stocks only have to be 40 percent of their historical levels, he noted. “Our message is this law is working, so let’s leave it alone and let it work,” Mr. Crockett said.
I was investigating peak wild-caught fish recently when I stumbled across Our Oceans Can't Survive Fishing Madness by Gareth Morgan and Geoff Simmons, authors of Hook, Line and Blinkers, an in-depth look at fishing off New Zealand. I was particularly struck by this passage. Scientists disagree over the size of the overfishing problem. Getting reliable catch data is hard enough, data on fish populations is a lot more difficult - we can't see them, and they move around. You may recognise some of the more alarmist claims — that most large fish populations are 10 per cent of their original size and that the oceans could collapse by 2046. [My note: They meant 2048.] More reliable stock assessments show that around a third of all fisheries are now overfished - in a state where the annual catch is a lot less than what could have been achieved, and worse - still falling. But even this data has its problems - it is only available for a handful of fisheries, and we often don't know what the original state of the fish population was so estimating the true sustainable yield is impossible. But what everyone can agree on is that the tragedy of the commons still exists in the global fishery, and that the only way around this problem is to manage our fisheries... Alarmist claims? WTF? You see, I am one of the people making these "alarmist" claims. Those claims are based on a paper which appeared in Science called Impacts of Biodiversity Loss on Ocean Ecosystem Services (2006). The lead author was Boris Worm of the Department of Biology at Dalhousie University, Halifax. Here's a graph from the paper. Worm_06_collapsed_taxa Fig. 3. Global loss of species from large marine ecosystems (LMEs). (A) Trajectories of collapsed fish and invertebrate taxa over the past 50 years (diamonds, collapses by year; triangles, cumulative collapses). Data are shown for all (black), species-poor (<500 species, blue), and species-rich (>500 species, red). (B) Map of all 64 LMEs, color-coded according to their total fish species richness. Morgan and Simmons refer to "more reliable stock assessments" which show that only about a third of all fisheries are overfished, not the nearly 70% shown by the black triangles in the graph shown. What's going on here? We get some of the story from Global Fisheries Declines Less Steep Than Earlier Reports, Study Says. A new study by U.S. researchers says that recent estimates of declining global fish stocks, including a 2006 report predicting a general collapse by 2048 without significant changes to fisheries management, were overstated because they relied on a flawed methodology. While earlier calculations were based on the amount of fish caught, the new report, published in the journal Conservation Biology, says calculations based on the estimated biomass of available stocks provides a more accurate assessment of the state of global fisheries. The earlier study by researchers at the University of British Columbia calculated that 70 percent of fish stocks had peaked and were now declining as a result of overharvesting, and that 30 percent of species had fallen to 10 percent of earlier numbers. Trevor Branch, a professor at the University of Washington and lead author of the new study, says an assessment based on biomass data reveals that, at most, 33 percent have been overharvested, and about 13 percent have collapsed. While Branch said those numbers are still a cause for significant concern, he said the findings suggest that fisheries management has helped stabilize fish stocks in most regions. It turns out there is an academic dispute between Trevor Branch (and supportive colleagues) and Boris Worm (and his supportive colleagues). We get some details from One Fish, Two Fish, False-ish, True-ish, published at the New York Times Green blog on May 1, 2011. It's worth reading because the devil is always in the details. The new study takes issue with a recent estimate that 70 percent of all stocks have been harvested to the point where their numbers have peaked and are now declining, and that 30 percent of all stocks have collapsed to less than one-tenth of their former numbers. Instead, it finds that at most 33 percent of all stocks are over-exploited and up to 13 percent of all stocks have collapsed. It’s not that fisheries are in great shape, said Trevor Branch, the lead author of the new study; it’s just that they are not as badly off as has been widely believed. In 2006, a study in the journal Science predicted a general collapse in global fisheries by 2048 if nothing were done to stem the decline. OK, that's a brief review of what I've told you so far. Let's get to the nub. The work led by Dr. Branch is another salvo in a scientific dispute — feud might be a better word — that pits Dr. Branch and his co-author Ray Hilborn at the University of Washington’s School of Aquatic and Fisheries Sciences and their allies against scientists at the University of British Columbia and their partisans. The latest paper argues that the methodology resulting in the most dire estimates, derived from records of the amount of fish caught, is not as accurate as data from the more broadly based United Nations assessment, based on the estimated biomass of available stocks of individual species. When the catch-based approach was applied to data on 234 global fish stocks from 1950 to 2006, it showed that 68 percent of all fisheries were either over-exploited (46 percent) or collapsed (22 percent) by the end of that period, while none were increasing. By contrast, when an assessment is based on an estimate of biomass, it showed that 28 percent of fisheries were either over-exploited (15 percent) or collapsed (13 percent). The second method also indicated 24 percent of the stocks were increasing. Fish_catch_versus_stocks Flawed methodology? Let's look at flawed methodologies. But Dirk Zeller, a scientist at the University of British Columbia who is on the other side of the debate, doesn’t buy all of Dr. Branch’s arguments. Yes, he said, using fish stock data is preferable to using catch data. But if reliable fish stock data is only available in developed countries like the United States or Australia — where fisheries management is reasonably well developed — what good is it in determining what is happening in the rest of the world? Dr. Zeller said that Dr. Branch and his University of Washington colleague Ray Hilborn had taken a stand in some previous papers that “if you look at fish stocks that have formal stock assessment processes, you find that many of them — not all — are relatively healthy. That’s valid.” “Where their argument falls down is that they extrapolate that pattern to global fisheries, and then say global fisheries aren’t doing that bad,” he said. “They totally ignore the fact that all of Asia, all of South America, all of Africa are not included.” Dr. Zeller added that 234 stocks are a tiny subset of thousands of species currently being fished, not a sample from which one can derive broad conclusions. Whoops! Dr. Branch and friends used a too-small sample, and then extrapolated it to the rest of the world. They couldn't include data from the ocean waters adjacent to all of Asia, all of South America, and all of Africa because it does not exist. In these areas of the world, fisheries management can hardly be said to exist, and thus there is no good data for fish stocks (as opposed to fish landings). [Zeller's] University of British Columbia colleague Daniel Pauly, who has objected to Dr. Branch’s work on other other occasions, is blunter. “The school of fisheries around Branch and Hilborn are now contesting everything that seems to be established,” he said in an interview. “The point is not whether you use catches or estimates of biomass inferred from other data. The point is that you make proper inferences"... “I have no argument with the point that with stocks that are well managed you can have sustainable fisheries,” Dr. Zeller said. He pointed out that he and Dr. Pauly have adjusted their online database to reflect a critique by Dr. Branch that their analysis had given short shrift to rebounding fish stocks. But he does maintain that data from catches are more applicable on a global scale than other data sets. Perhaps you are tired of this seemingly academic dispute, so I'll cut off the discussion now and make a few remarks of my own. When I say the world's fisheries are likely to have completely collapsed by 2048, I am not talking out my ass. I am making that claim based upon the best available science. That is not an "alarmist" claim. It is based on valid inferences from what is known about wild-caught fish landings, aka. peak fish. But there a deeper level of perception and insight available here. Unless well-established human behaviors were to change in wholly unexpected ways in the future, we will to overfish the oceans until almost the fish species there are either commercially extinct, and therefore unexploitable—this is the more likely outcome for most species—or physically extinct, meaning gone forever. We've got this one Earth. We've got this one set of oceans. That's all we've got. This is not an academic dispute. We're talking about the ultimate fate of humanity and most of the Earth's living organisms. Only on Planet Stupid would this debate even be taking place. Denial is not going to fix the problem. This is how Felicity Barringer—yes, that is her name—concluded her New York Times article. Even without the aid of mathematical modeling, it is possible to predict that fish population debates themselves will remain sustainable for some time to come. A clever ending, worthy of somebody named Felicity. If only 50%, not 33% or 70%, of the world's marine fisheries have collapsed or are over-exploited, it appears to be only a matter of time before humankind "achieves" 100% of the fisheries, so what difference does it make? So don't call Worm's or Pauly's views of the oceans alarmist. None of this would be happening if humankind could take its collective head out of its collective ass. No doubt Felicity is right. Humans will be debating "fish population" questions right up to the time when such debates make no difference at all because at that point, catching a fish in the ocean will be a cause for much celebration.
THIS Lent, many ecologically conscious Americans might feel a twinge of guilt as they dig into the fish on their Friday dinner plates. They shouldn’t. Over the last decade the public has been bombarded by apocalyptic predictions about the future of fish stocks — in 2006, for instance, an article in the journal Science projected that all fish stocks could be gone by 2048. Subsequent research, including a paper I co-wrote in Science in 2009 with Boris Worm, the lead author of the 2006 paper, has shown that such warnings were exaggerated. Much of the earlier research pointed to declines in catches and concluded that therefore fish stocks must be in trouble. But there is little correlation between how many fish are caught and how many actually exist; over the past decade, for example, fish catches in the United States have dropped because regulators have lowered the allowable catch. On average, fish stocks worldwide appear to be stable, and in the United States they are rebuilding, in many cases at a rapid rate. The overall record of American fisheries management since the mid-1990s is one of improvement, not of decline. Perhaps the most spectacular recovery is that of bottom fish in New England, especially haddock and redfish; their abundance has grown sixfold from 1994 to 2007. Few if any fish species in the United States are now being harvested at too high a rate, and only 24 percent remain below their desired abundance. Much of the success is a result of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act, which was signed into law 35 years ago this week. It banned foreign fishing within 200 miles of the United States shoreline and established a system of management councils to regulate federal fisheries. In the past 15 years, those councils, along with federal and state agencies, nonprofit organizations and commercial and sport fishing groups, have helped assure the sustainability of the nation’s fishing stocks. Some experts, like Daniel Pauly of the University of British Columbia Fisheries Center, who warns of “the end of fish,” fault the systems used to regulate fisheries worldwide. But that condemnation is too sweeping, and his prescription — closing much of the world’s oceans to fishing — would leave people hungry unnecessarily. Many of the species that are fished too much worldwide fall into two categories: highly migratory species that are subject to international fishing pressures, and bottom fish — like cod, haddock, flounder and sole — that are caught in “mixed fisheries,” where it is impossible to catch one species but not another. We also know little about the sustainability of fish caught in much of Asia and Africa. The Atlantic bluefin tuna is emblematic of the endangered migratory species; its numbers are well below the target set by the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, and the catches in the Eastern Atlantic are too high. Many species of sharks also fall into this category. Because these stocks are fished by international fleets, reducing the catch requires global cooperation and American leadership. But not all highly migratory fish are in danger; the albacore, skipjack and yellowfin tuna and swordfish on American menus are not threatened. Managing the mixed fisheries in American waters requires different tactics. On the West Coast, fish stocks have been strongly revived over the past decade through conservative management: fleet size reductions, highly restrictive catch limits and the closing of large areas to certain kinds of nets, hooks and traps. Rebuilding, however, has come at a cost: to prevent overharvesting and protect weak species, about 30 percent of the potential sustainable harvest from productive species (those that can be harvested at higher rates) goes untapped. A similar tradeoff is going on in New England, where the management council, made up of federal and state representatives, restricts the harvesting of bottom fish like cod and yellowtail flounder in both the Gulf of Maine and Georges Bank, off Cape Cod. In trying to rebuild the cod, regulators have had to limit the catch of the much more abundant haddock, which are caught in the same nets. The Magnuson Act regulating federal fisheries has been successful, but it needs to be revised. The last time it was reauthorized, in 2006, it required the rebuilding of overfished stocks within 10 years. That rule is too inflexible and hurts fishing communities from New England to California. A better option is to give the management councils greater discretion in setting targets and deadlines for rebuilding fish stocks. We are caught between the desire for oceans as pristine ecosystems and the desire for sustainable seafood. Are we willing to accept some depleted species to increase long-term sustainable food production in return? After all, if fish are off the menu, we will likely eat more beef, chicken and pork. And the environmental costs of producing more livestock are much higher than accepting fewer fish in the ocean: lost habitat, the need for ever more water, pesticides, fertilizer and antibiotics, chemical runoff and “dead zones” in the world’s seas. Suddenly, that tasty, healthful and environmentally friendly fish on the plate looks a lot more appetizing.
FOR American fish, this is a good time to be alive. On May 14th the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) reported that a record six federal fisheries returned to health last year. After a decade of similar progress, 86% of America's roughly 250 federally monitored commercial fish stocks were not subject to overfishing; 79% were considered healthy. This is also good for American fishermen. Commercial and recreational fishing generates an estimated $183 billion a year and supports over 1.5m full-time or part-time jobs. Rebuilding America's 45 remaining over-exploited fish stocks, NOAA estimates, could generate an extra $31 billion a year and half a million jobs. That is a tribute to America learning a simple truth—that scientists, not fishermen or politicians, should decide how many fish can be caught—and enforcing this with simple rules. It has taken a while. America's main fishery law established the importance of scientific quotas in 1976. Yet this was routinely ignored because of poor science and weak enforcement, abetted by influential fishermen—notably in New England, which was built on once-rich Atlantic cod and haddock fisheries. The Massachusetts House of Representatives contains a conspicuous symbol of this: the “Sacred Cod”, a 200-year-old fish of solid pine, hanging from its ceiling.
To fish our waters more sustainably, we need to know what the sustained maximum yield is. One theoretical estimate puts the estimated annual production at 240 million metric tons. The estimated annual harvest is half of this: 100-120 mmt. The current annual harvest is about 100 mmt. Not all areas of the ocean are equally productive (Figure 5). As you can see from this figure, the coastal margins such as mangroves and saltmarshes are much more productive relative to their volume than the open ocean. Therefore, to accurately estimate the maximum yield of the ocean, we must look at the zones separately. The estimate used above was obtained by dividing the ocean into three zones: open ocean, coastal areas, and upwelling areas. The estimate for the productivity of each of the three zones was estimated based on three values: primary plant production, food chain length, and food chain efficiency. To further understand the relationship these values and productivity, you may want to review some lectures from last semester: The Flow of Energy: Primary Production explains how primary production is estimated in marine waters, and The Flow of Energy: Higher Trophic Levels discusses ecological efficiency of the food chain and the loss of energy with each trophic transfer (the "10% Rule").
STATE COLLEGE, Pennsylvania -- The majority of tiny marine plants weathered the abrupt climate changes that occurred in Earth's past and bounced back, according to a Penn State geoscientist.
With global temperatures continuing their decade-long decline and United Nations-sponsored global warming talks falling apart in Copenhagen, alarmists   at the U.N. talks spent considerable time claiming carbon dioxide emissions will cause catastrophic ocean acidification, regardless of whether temperatures rise. The latest scientific data, however, show no such catastrophe is likely to occur. Food Supply Risk Claimed The United Kingdom’s environment secretary, Hilary Benn, initiated the Copenhagen ocean scare with a high-profile speech and numerous media interviews claiming ocean acidification threatens the world’s food supply. “The fact is our seas absorb CO2. They absorb about a quarter of the total that we produce, but it is making our seas more acidic,” said Benn in his speech. “If this continues as a problem, then it can affect the one billion people who depend on fish as their principle source of protein, and we have to feed another 2½ to 3 billion people over the next 40 to 50 years.” Benn’s claim of oceans becoming “more acidic” is misleading, however. Water with a pH of 7.0 is considered neutral. pH values lower than 7.0 are considered acidic, while those higher than 7.0 are considered alkaline. The world’s oceans have a pH of 8.1, making them alkaline, not acidic. Increasing carbon dioxide concentrations would make the oceans less alkaline but not acidic. Since human industrial activity first began emitting carbon dioxide into the atmosphere a little more than 200 years ago, the pH of the oceans has fallen merely 0.1, from 8.2 to 8.1. Following Benn’s December 14 speech and public relations efforts, most of the world’s major media outlets produced stories claiming ocean acidification is threatening the world’s marine life. An Associated Press headline, for example, went so far as to call ocean acidification the “evil twin” of climate change. Studies Show CO2 Benefits Numerous recent scientific studies show higher carbon dioxide levels in the world’s oceans have the same beneficial effect on marine life as higher levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide have on terrestrial plant life. In a 2005 study published in the Journal of Geophysical Research, scientists examined trends in chlorophyll concentrations, critical building blocks in the oceanic food chain. The French and American scientists reported “an overall increase of the world ocean average chlorophyll concentration by about 22 percent” during the prior two decades of increasing carbon dioxide concentrations. In a 2006 study published in Global Change Biology, scientists observed higher CO2 levels are correlated with better growth conditions for oceanic life. The highest CO2 concentrations produced “higher growth rates and biomass yields” than the lower CO2 conditions. Higher CO2 levels may well fuel “subsequent primary production, phytoplankton blooms, and sustaining oceanic food-webs,” the study concluded. Ocean Life ‘Surprisingly Resilient’ In a 2008 study published in Biogeosciences, scientists subjected marine organisms to varying concentrations of CO2, including abrupt changes of CO2 concentration. The ecosystems were “surprisingly resilient” to changes in atmospheric CO2, and “the ecosystem composition, bacterial and phytoplankton abundances and productivity, grazing rates and total grazer abundance and reproduction were not significantly affected by CO2-induced effects.” In a 2009 study published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, scientists reported, “Sea star growth and feeding rates increased with water temperature from 5ºC to 21ºC. A doubling of current [CO2] also increased growth rates both with and without a concurrent temperature increase from 12ºC to 15ºC.” Another False CO2 Scare “Far too many predictions of CO2-induced catastrophes are treated by alarmists as sure to occur, when real-world observations show these doomsday scenarios to be highly unlikely or even virtual impossibilities,” said Craig Idso, Ph.D., author of the 2009 book CO2, Global Warming and Coral Reefs. “The phenomenon of CO2-induced ocean acidification appears to be no different.
Phytoplankton can rebound after nearly a century of dormancy in the dark, explaining why these microbes were resilient after the most recent global photosynthesis disruption and the accompanying mass extinction.
But recent observations and new analyses of existing data suggest an opposite result: A climate warming could slow down SLR not accelerate it. To understand this counterintuitive result, one must first get rid of false leads -- just as in a detective story. The misleading argument here is the oft-quoted statement that the climate warmed by 1 F (0.6 C) in the last 100 years -- and that sea level rose by 18 cm. Both parts of the statement are true; but the second part does not necessarily follow from the first. Two clues The first clue that there might be something amiss with the IPCC logic comes from the IPCC report itself. According to this authoritative source, the contribution to SLR of the past century comes mainly from three sources: (i) thermal expansion of the warming ocean contributed about 4 cm; (ii) the melting of continental glaciers about 3.5 cm. [Note that the melting of floating sea ice does not raise SL] (iii) the polar regions, on the other hand, produced a slight net lowering of sea level, with most of it coming from the Antarctic [IPCC 1996; Table 7.3]. (The mechanism is intuitively easy to understand but difficult to calculate: A warming ocean evaporates more water, and some of it rains out in the Polar Regions, thus transferring water from the ocean into snow and ice at the polar ice caps.) The major new result here is that when one simply adds up all these estimated contributions (neglecting the large uncertainties), they account for only about 20 percent of the observed rise of 18 cm. The temperature rise since 1900 cannot account for the observed SLR. Something is missing here. An additional fact is discussed in detail in my 1997 book "Hot Talk, Cold Science" (Independent Institute, 1997). During the strong warming of 1920-1940 there was no SLR -- indicating a rough balance between the opposing effects. In fact, scrutinizing the record, I can even discern a slight lowering of sea level, an over-compensation. Unfortunately, back then in 1997 we had no data on Antarctic ice accumulation; so the hypothesis was not publishable. However, now we do have sufficient data in support of such a scenario. But if, as surmised, ice accumulation roughly balances ocean thermal expansion and contributions from melting mountain glaciers, why then is sea level rising? Another riddle requiring a solution. The relevant clue comes from corals and from geological observations: It seems that sea level has been rising for the past centuries at about the same rate as seen by tidal gauges in the last 100 years. In other words, sea level was rising even during the colder Little Ice age, from about 1400 to 1850 AD. This provides further support for the hypothesis that the observed global SLR since 1900 is reasonably independent of the observed temperature rise. [It is also a killing argument against a widely quoted ('semi-empirical') theory that assumes rate of SLR is proportional to global surface temperature.] The full explanation to this riddle had been suspected for some time, based on historic data on SLR from corals (Fairbanks) and ice volume (Shackleton). But the picture was filled in only recently (Bindschadler 1998) through measurements of the rate of melting of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS), by tracing the millennial-scale shrinking of the WAIS [Conway et al. 1999]. Note that the WAIS is not floating sea ice; like a mountain glacier, its melting contributes more water to the ocean, thus raising the global sea level. We can therefore describe the broad scenario as follows: The strong temperature increase that followed the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) about 18,000 years ago has melted enough ice to raise sea level by 120 meters (400 feet). The rate of rise was quite rapid at first and controlled by the melting of the huge ice sheets covering North America and the Eurasian land mass. These disappeared about 8000-5000 years ago; but then, as sea level rose, the WAIS continued to melt, albeit at a much lower rate -- and it is still melting at about this rate today. The principal conclusion is that this melting (and corresponding SLR of about 18 cm [7 inches] per century) will continue for another several millennia, until the WAIS is all gone -- unless another ice age takes over. And there is nothing that we can do to stop this future sea level rise! It is as inevitable as the ocean tides. Fortunately, coral reefs will continue to grow, as they have in the past, to keep up with SLR. The rest of us will just have to adapt to future SLR, as our ancestors did some10,000 years ago. At least we are better equipped with technology to deal with such environmental changes. Anthropogenic Global Warming (AGW) may not affect SLR A final note: What about the effects of human-induced global warming on SLR? Will it really increase the rate above its natural value, as predicted by the IPCC? We do have a handle on this question by observing what happened when the climate warmed suddenly between 1920 and 1940, before cooling between 1940 and 1975. The answer is quite surprising and could not have been derived from theory or from mathematical models. The data show that SLR slowed down slightly when the climate warmed and accelerated when the climate cooled. Evidently, ocean-water thermal expansion and mountain-glacier melting were less important than ice accumulation on the Antarctic continent (which would of course act to lower sea level). By analogy, a warming produced by an increase in greenhouse gases should give the same result: i.e., reduce the rate of rise of sea level. This is not a policy recommendation that burning more coal might save Venice from drowning. It is a modest appeal to politicians to take note of scientific developments and to make the necessary corrections to the course of negotiations now underway.
Here again, several feedback phenomena must be considered. If the global temperature will continue to rise, more sea water will evaporate, lowering the sea level, while the same rise will produce a heat-induced expansion of ocean. So far it is not realistically possible to estimate which phenomenon will prevail. It is quite possible that they will each other cancel out. And the process of latent heat of evaporation, which is a cooling process, will also come into play. Moreover, continuous evaporation will produce clouds, which might or might not be positive feedbacks depending on their make-up and their altitude. A consequence of cloud formation will eventually be precipitation which in the polar areas will take the form of snow. It is important to take into consideration that an opposite phenomena is still taking place. It is the isostatic rebound of the land, which results from the melting ice from both ice caps, but especially from the Arctic one. The weight of this enormous volume of melting ice has depressed the Earth's crust by 700-800 meters. Once the ice weight is removed, the crust is rebounding to reach its normal isostatic level. Such isostatic adjustment will simultaneously lower the water level, especially in the northern hemisphere.
The IPCC expects sea levels to rise 9—88 cm by 2100 — a wide-ranging figure, and, given scientific uncertainties, the high figure should be taken with a pinch of salt. Even if sea levels were to rise by as much as a metre, it would be a minor problem. In some parts of the world, people would have to adapt to avoid flooding. The IPCC predicts that damage to infrastructure in coastal areas would costs tens of billions of dollars. However, these estimates are based on the rather absurd assumption that people and countries will just idly sit by and watch. Instead countries would act to protect coastal areas — just as the people of Holland have done for centuries. This adaptation can be done with relatively low costs. The IPCC estimates that for most countries the costs of protection are in the region of 0.1% of GDP.’ The US Environmental Protection Agency has estimated that the cost of coastal protection against a whopping 1-metre rise in sea level would be just 1.5% of one year’s GDP at current levels of output. Since sea levels rise gradually, the investment could be spread out over 50 to 100 years. On top of that, most of the investment would take place in a future where the US GDP would be anywhere from five to ten times higher than the present. In other words, even a 1-metre sea level rise would have little impact on human welfare, even if developed countries were to finance all adaptive measures in developing countries.
It's a tale of two earthquakes. One, the second-biggest ever recorded, ripped the seafloor just west of Sumatra, Indonesia, in December 2004 and unleashed a tsunami that caused destruction across the entire Indian Ocean basin. The other, nearly as large, struck the same general area 3 months later but caused only a localized tsunami and much less coastal devastation. Published tomorrow in Science, an international team reports finding what could be the critical difference between these disasters: the density of the sedimentary rock overlying the quake zone. Measuring that variable in other, geologically similar areas prone to major earthquakes could give seismologists and emergency planners a better understanding of where to expect the worst.
TAIPEI -- A research team at Taiwan's National Cheng Kung University said Thursday it is developing a warning system that it believes can provide much needed warning time in the event of a tsunami by monitoring ionospheric disturbances. The system is being developed by a team led by Charles Lin, an associate professor at the university's Department of Earth Sciences. Using a network of GPS receivers, the system can monitor changes in the ionosphere caused by corresponding disturbances on the surface of the Earth such as earthquakes and tsunamis. Early warning is possible because disturbances in the iononsphere travel much faster than tsunamis. Ionosphere is a layer of electrons and ion particles that surrounds the Earth, stretching from an altitude of about 100 kilometers to 800 km, the team said.
GSR Ventures has joined with Oak Investment Partners to create a new, independent fund, G-O Scale Capital, that will invest in clean-technology companies–especially ones that can scale in China, Yuliya Chernova reports in VentureWire.
In a new report out from Cleantech Group, the World Wildlife Foundation, and the The Swedish Agency for Economic and Regional Growth (or Tillväxtverket), 40 countries were examined for their potential for entrepreneurial clean tech startups. The report takes a 10-year look down the line and ranks each country on a basis of 15 different indicators. Let’s take a look at the top 10.
Yet even as China inaugurated its first organization dedicated to enhancing Beijing’s soft power, a number of disparate events in China were illustrating why the CCP’s charm offensive is doomed to fail. For example, in recent weeks the Chinese government has redoubled its efforts to censor the internet. After social media users in China exposed a series of scandals involving low-level government officials, the CCP adopted new regulations that require internet service providers to quickly delete “illegal” posts and turn over the evidence to government officials. Additionally, after trying to require citizens to use their real names on social media sites like Weibo, the new regulations require citizens to use their real identities when signing up with an internet provider. More secretly, according to many inside China, authorities have been strengthening the great firewall to prevent users from employing various methods in order to gain access to a growing number of sites that are banned. China is hardly the only government concerned about the political instability unfettered internet access can generate. In fact, last month China joined 89 countries in supporting a United Nations telecommunications treaty that over 20 nations opposed over fears that it would open the door to greater government control over cyberspace. But while China’s suppression of information may resonate with political elites in authoritarian states, the world is living in the information age and attempts to restrict the flow of information for political reasons will not endear China to the global masses that soft power seeks to attract. China’s internet policies also conflict with the stated goals of its soft power offensive in more concrete ways as well. For example, one of the primary goals of the CPDA is to increase the number of people-to-people exchanges with other countries. However, if the CCP is successful in preventing users from accessing popular sites like Facebook, Twitter, You Tube, and the New York Times, it is likely to discourage foreigners from living or studying abroad in China. Similarly, blocking access to these sites inhibits communication between Chinese and foreigners over cyberspace. Along with tighter restrictions on the Internet, Chinese authorities have also increased their scrutiny on media outlets, both domestic and foreign. Domestically, the CCP ushered in the New Year by closing down the fiercely liberal magazine, Yanhuang Chunqiu, ostensibly because its registration had been invalid since August 2010. Then, on Friday, 51 prominent journalists issued an open letter demanding the resignation of Tuo Zhen, the Communist Party’s propaganda chief in Guangdong Province, who they accused of “raping” the Southern Weekly’s editorial page when he allegedly altered its annual New Year’s Greeting right as it went to press, and without the knowledge or consent of the editor. The journalists were later joined by over two dozen prominent academics from the Chinese mainland, Hong Kong, and Taiwan who published their own open letter calling for Tuo's resignation. Southern Weekly (also referred to as Southern Weekend) is a highly regarded reform-minded Guangdong newspaper, and its annual New Year’s Greeting has traditionally pushed the bounds of acceptable political discussion in China. This year’s editorial originally parodied Xi Jinping’s "Chinese Dream" by calling for the realization of the “dream of constitutionalism in China” where civil rights and the rule-of-law are respected and upheld. After Tuo’s changes, the editorial expressed gratitude to the Communist Party for helping the country achieve the Chinese Dream. According to David Bandurski, editor of China Media Project, "This kind of direct hands-on interference is really something new” and extreme even by China's strict regulation of domestic media. Indeed, after the government tried to silence the growing outrage over Tuo's actions, including by shutting down Southern Weekly staff members' personal Weibo accounts, the entire editorial staff at the newspaper decided to stage a strike, marking the first time in over two decades that the editorial staff of a major Chinese newspaper has gone on strike over government censorship, according to the South China Morning Post. China also continued its campaign against foreign journalists and news organizations last week when Chris Buckley, an Australian-national and China correspondent for the New York Times, was forced to leave the country because Beijing wouldn’t renew his visa. Following Buckley’s departure the New York Times said its China bureau chief, Philip PPan—author of Out of Mao’s Shadow—has been waiting since March to receive his own credentials. Beijing later claimed Buckley hadn’t submitted the proper paperwork, but his case follows on the heels of Al Jazeera’s Melissa Chan’s expulsion from the country and the Washington Post’s Andrew Higgins finally ending his three-year quest to gain reentry into China, which failed even after the newspaper enlisted the help of Henry Kissinger. Thus, the more plausible explanation for Buckley’s inability to renew his visa is that Beijing is retaliating against foreign journalists because of the extraordinary reporting organizations like the New York Times have been doing on politically taboo subjects in China, such as stories on the enormous amount of wealth the families of senior leaders have accumulated. This reporting is also why the websites of the New York Times and Bloomberg News are no longer accessible in China, and why reporters from these organizations weren’t able to attend the unveiling of the Politburo Standing Committee at the 18th Party Congress in November. its ability to tolerate (much less cultivate) South Korean rapper Psy, and the “flash mobs” he’s inspired in places as varied as Jakarta, Bangkok, Sydney, Dhaka, Mumbai, Dubai,American college campuses and shopping malls, Taipei, Hong Kong, and, yes, the Chinese mainland. to export its cultural products, as Peng Kan, the author of the op-ed rightly notes, through official communication channel. Indeed, it’s telling that China’s most popular non-governmental figures abroad are all opponents of the CCP. One such individual is democracy advocate Liu Xiaobo, who celebrated his 57th birthday on December 28th and the 3rd anniversary of being sentenced to an 11-year prison term on December 25th. This sentence only increased Liu’s international stature where he has been celebrated widely and awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2010 (which the CCP responded to by placing his wife under house arrest). Indeed Liu’s international renowned was on display last month when 134 Nobel laureates sent Xi Jinping a letter urging him to release Liu. Eclipsing Liu in popularity at least in the West, however, is Ai Weiwei, the famous Chinese artist and dissident. Ai Weiwei’s remarkable artistic talent made him famous in some circles, initially including the CCP and across the globe before his turn to social activism. It is undeniable, however, that much of his popularity has come from his courageous and witty challenge to Communist Party rule in China. It is this charismatic political dissent that explains why documentaries of him win at Sundance, Nicholas Kristof of the New York Times interviews him while visiting China, and his “Gangam Style” parody becomes an instant You Tube sensation, despite the fact that its underlying political message is lost on almost all its viewers. hardly alone in In fact, this problem is practically inherent in authoritarian states (just ask Vladimir Putin). and David and Goliath is one of the most recognizable stories from Jewish and Christian religious texts. But this fact does not make Liu and Ai Weiwei any less damaging to the CCP’s ability to project soft power. and the soft power individuals like Ai Weiwei command under the current political leadership. Pan—author of Out of Mao’s Shadow—has been waiting since March to receive his own credentials. Beijing later claimed Buckley hadn’t submitted the proper paperwork, but his case follows on the heels of Al Jazeera’s Melissa Chan’s expulsion from the country and the Washington Post’s Andrew Higgins finally ending his three-year quest to gain reentry into China, which failed even after the newspaper enlisted the help of Henry Kissinger. Thus, the more plausible explanation for Buckley’s inability to renew his visa is that Beijing is retaliating against foreign journalists because of the extraordinary reporting organizations like the New York Times have been doing on politically taboo subjects in China, such as stories on the enormous amount of wealth the families of senior leaders have accumulated. This reporting is also why the websites of the New York Times and Bloomberg News are no longer accessible in China, and why reporters from these organizations weren’t able to attend the unveiling of the Politburo Standing Committee at the 18th Party Congress in November. Finally, the CCP’s soft power offensive is doomed to fail because of its ability to tolerate (much less cultivate) “cultural ambassadors.” In the realm of soft power, a county’s entertainers, artists, and intellectuals are some of its strongest assets. One needs only to look to South Korean rapper Psy, and the “flash mobs” he’s inspired in places as varied as Jakarta, Bangkok, Sydney, Dhaka, Mumbai, Dubai,American college campuses and shopping malls, Taipei, Hong Kong, and, yes, the Chinese mainland. A country as large and dynamic as China undoubtedly has many potential worldwide celebrities. And yet, as a China Daily op-ed points out, China “is still far from making a product like Gangnam Style. China does export a large amount of cultural products every year, but few of them become popular abroad.” The major reason China fails to export its cultural products, as Peng Kan, the author of the op-ed rightly notes, is that “Government organizations and enterprises are the main force behind the exports….But these organizations and enterprises… cannot promote satires like Gangnam Style through official communication channel. But cultural products without entertainment value rarely become popular in overseas markets.” Indeed, it’s telling that China’s most popular non-governmental figures abroad are all opponents of the CCP. One such individual is democracy advocate Liu Xiaobo, who celebrated his 57th birthday on December 28th and the 3rd anniversary of being sentenced to an 11-year prison term on December 25th. This sentence only increased Liu’s international stature where he has been celebrated widely and awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2010 (which the CCP responded to by placing his wife under house arrest). Indeed Liu’s international renowned was on display last month when 134 Nobel laureates sent Xi Jinping a letter urging him to release Liu. Eclipsing Liu in popularity at least in the West, however, is Ai Weiwei, the famous Chinese artist and dissident. Ai Weiwei’s remarkable artistic talent made him famous in some circles, initially including the CCP and across the globe before his turn to social activism. It is undeniable, however, that much of his popularity has come from his courageous and witty challenge to Communist Party rule in China. It is this charismatic political dissent that explains why documentaries of him win at Sundance, Nicholas Kristof of the New York Times interviews him while visiting China, and his “Gangam Style” parody becomes an instant You Tube sensation, despite the fact that its underlying political message is lost on almost all its viewers. China is hardly alone in making dissidents it persecutes famous internationally. In fact, this problem is practically inherent in authoritarian states (just ask Vladimir Putin). There’s a nearly universal tendency for people to sympathize with an “underdog” who is courageously battling a powerful force like a government, which is why a Tunisian street vendor setting himself on fire can spark uprisings throughout the Arab world, and David and Goliath is one of the most recognizable stories from Jewish and Christian religious texts. But this fact does not make Liu and Ai Weiwei any less damaging to the CCP’s ability to project soft power. Symbolic figures like Liu and Ai Weiwei ingrain into people’s minds the perception that the CCP is synonymous with injustice. And hardly any emotion is as universally held as the righteousness of justice, however one defines it. On a more primeval basis, people are attracted to confidence, and attempts to suppress information and dissidents creates the perception that, despite all its power and remarkable achievements, the CCP remains at its core fearful and paranoid. Few people are attracted to, much less want to emulate, those they consider fearful or paranoid. Which is why, despite China’s ancient history of soft power, and the soft power individuals like Ai Weiwei command, modern China’s soft power will remain limited under the current political leadership.
In his new book, China Goes Global, George Washington University's David Shambaugh shows how China has spent billions of dollars on a charm offensive to increase its soft power. Chinese aid programs to Africa and Latin America are not limited by the institutional or human rights concerns that constrain Western aid. The Chinese style emphasizes high-profile gestures. But for all its efforts, China has earned a limited return on its investment. Polls show that opinions of China's influence are positive in much of Africa and Latin America, but predominantly negative in the United States, Europe, as well as India, Japan and South Korea. Even China's soft-power triumphs, such as the 2008 Beijing Olympics, have quickly turned stale. Not long after the last international athletes had departed, China's domestic crackdown on human rights activists undercut its soft power gains. Again in 2009, the Shanghai Expo was a great success, but it was followed by the jailing of Nobel Peace Laureate Liu Xiaobo and screens were dominated by scenes of an empty chair at the Oslo ceremonies. Putin might likewise count on a soft power boost from the Sochi Olympics, but if he continues to repress dissent, he, too, is likely to step on his own message.¶ China and Russia make the mistake of thinking that government is the main instrument of soft power. In today's world, information is not scarce but attention is, and attention depends on credibility. Government propaganda is rarely credible. The best propaganda is not propaganda. For all the efforts to turn Xinhua and China Central Television into competitors to CNN and the BBC, there is little international audience for brittle propaganda. As the Economist noted about China, "the party has not bought into Mr. Nye's view that soft power springs largely from individuals, the private sector, and civil society. So the government has taken to promoting ancient cultural icons whom it thinks might have global appeal." But soft power doesn't work that way. As Pang Zhongying of Renmin University put it, it highlights "a poverty of thought" among Chinese leaders.¶ The development of soft power need not be a zero-sum game. All countries can gain from finding each other attractive. But for China and Russia to succeed, they will need to match words and deeds in their policies, be self-critical, and unleash the full talents of their civil societies. Unfortunately, that is not about to happen soon.
In much of the developing world, the apparent love affair with China likely remains shallow and fragile. The ambiguous and much-debated China Model or Beijing Consensus is only superﬁcially understood and disappointments that would accompany attempted implementation have not yet been encountered. The embrace of China may prove little more than an implicit quid pro quo for diplomatic support, modest development assistance and foreign investment. These are not the most pure or robust forms of softpower. In some cases and on some accounts, they do not even count as soft power. With China’s growing economic presence—concentrated in extractive industries, low-end service sectors, and manufactured exports—come looming and already-materializing risks to China’s image in Africa, Latin America and elsewhere. Complaints of labor abuses, neocolonialism, environmental degradation and hollowing out of labor-intensive local economic sectors have already begun to surface. Nearer China’s periphery, economic integrationdriven bandwagoning with China is easily exaggerated. As more careful analyses have pointed out, East and Southeast Asian states are wary of China, remain more attracted to U.S. values than PRC ones, and have combined growing links to China with recommitments to ties with the United States through strategies that can be variously—if not wholly satisfactorily—characterized as balancing, double-bandwagoning or hedging.64 Throughout much of the non-Western world, seeming Sinophilia is to some extent super-ﬁcial and self-indulgent tweaking of a sole superpower that is seen as havingbeen on a binge of neglect and abuse. According to major global public opinion surveys and inﬂuential Chinese scholars’ own estimates, China has scored only limited successes and still badly trails the United States in soft power.65 Second, as we have seen, China’s soft power resources are plagued by internal contradictions. To build and emphasize some dimensions is to undermine others. Playing up residual communism can narrow the relevance and appeal of the China Model. Trumpeting strong commitments to sovereignty can raise doubts—especially when Taiwan is the issue or when Beijing backs pariah regimes—about Beijing’s claims to be a benevolent, peace-seeking and responsible power. And so on. Third, key types of Chinese soft power resources remain thin. As many analysts at home and abroad have noted, China’s political institutions and ofﬁcial values do not enjoy broad appeal, nor does China’s record on socialequity, the environment, international human rights and other matters.66 The international relevance, content and even existence of a China Model for development are as much foci of debate as they are rich sources of soft power that can alter foreigners’ attitudes and preferences in ways that serve Chinese interests. China’s soft power remains heavily statist, lacking the popular culture, commercial and civil society dimensions that provide much of the might of American soft power.67A slowing of China’s growth rate or rise in its perceived collateral costs is far from unimaginable and would dim the luster of the China Model. Even continued success could sap soft power as a more prosperous China would become, like Taiwan, seemingly less relevant to the developing world. Fourth, China may suffer from a particularly pronounced case of the general problem that soft power resources can be difﬁcult to deploy, especially to achieve afﬁrmative (as opposed to defensive) policy aims. The attractive force of a China Model of development or vigorous defenses of sovereignty or traditional Chinese culture do not translate neatly or more than very indirectly into support in the international system for likely PRC policy agendas that go beyond defusing fears of a rising China.68 Many of China’s high-proﬁle soft power-building international activities have been pro-status quo (for example, supporting a state-centric international system and a relatively liberal international economic order and largely accepting thenDeputy Secretary of State Zoellick’s call on China to be a ‘‘responsible stakeholder’’) or have served values that are more like the United States’ than the PRC’s (in the case of humanitarian and democracy-promotion agendas associated with UN peacekeeping operations and other PRC moves to engage with the international human rights regime).69 Seemingly more revisionist efforts (mostly on economic issues and especially with the advent of the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis) so far have been, variously, rhetorical, vague, tentative and not very inﬂuential. Especially in the closing years of the twenty-ﬁrst century’s ﬁrst decade, China has given reason to doubt its will or ability to stick to a line that will maximize its soft power. Some of what Beijing says and does is bad for China’s soft-power inﬂuence with key international constituencies. Examples include: newly haughty (if, on the merits, plausible) lectures about the shortcomings of American-style capitalism and Washington’s regulatory regime; proud and sometimes strident nationalism at the 2008 Beijing Olympics and in response to perceived provocations from alleged foreign-backed separatists in Tibet and Xinjiang; high-proﬁle actions against pro-democracy, pro-human rights and pro-civil liberties elements; declarations that Western-style democracy is not appropriate for China; and prominent statements implying or asserting that theworld needs to learn to deal with China on Chinese terms.
Democracy is championed as a universal good by the West, but we over-estimate its power to guarantee personal and political freedom, argues Roger Scruton. For some time, the leading Western nations have acted upon the assumption that democracy is the solution to political conflict, and that the ultimate goal of foreign policy must be to encourage the emergence of democracy in countries which have not yet enjoyed its benefits. And they continue to adhere to this assumption, even when considering events in the Middle East today. We can easily sympathise with it. For democracies do not, in general, go to war with each other, and do not, in general, experience civil war within their borders. Where the people can choose their government, there is a safety valve that prevents conflicts from over-heating. Unpopular governments are rejected without violence. The championship of democracy has therefore become a settled feature of Western foreign policy. In retrospect, the Cold War has been seen as a conflict between democracy and totalitarianism, in which democracy finally triumphed. And with democracy came the liberation of the people of the former communist states. Where there had been tyranny and oppression, there was now freedom and human rights. And if we study the words of Western politicians, we will constantly find that the three ideas - democracy, freedom and human rights - are spoken of in one breath, and assumed in all circumstances to coincide. That, for many of our political leaders, is the lesson to be drawn from the Cold War and the final collapse of the Soviet empire. In my view, the idea that there is a single, one-size-fits-all solution to social and political conflict around the world, and that democracy is the name of it, is based on a disregard of historical and cultural conditions, and a failure to see that democracy is only made possible by other and more deeply hidden institutions. And while we are willing to accept that democracy goes hand in hand with individual freedom and the protection of human rights, we often fail to realise that these three things are three things, not one, and that it is only under certain conditions that they coincide. Democracy was introduced into Russia without any adequate protection for human rights. And many human rights were protected in 19th Century Britain long before the emergence of anything that we would call democracy. In the Middle East today, we find parties standing for election, like the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, which regards an electoral victory as the opportunity to crush dissent and impose a way of life that for many citizens is simply unacceptable. In such circumstances democracy is a threat to human rights and not a way of protecting them. The totalitarian system endures by abolishing the distinction between civil society and the state” I had the opportunity to study some of these issues during the 1980s, when visiting friends and colleagues who were attempting to plant the seeds of opposition in the communist countries. These were public-spirited citizens, who ran the risk of arrest and imprisonment for activities which you and I would regard as entirely innocent. They ran classes for young people who had been deprived of an education on account of their parents' political profile. They established support networks for writers, scholars, musicians and artists who were banned from presenting their work. They smuggled medicines, bibles, religious symbols and textbooks. And because charities were illegal under communism and religious institutions were controlled by the Communist Party, all this work had to be conducted in secret. The totalitarian system, I learned, endures not simply by getting rid of democratic elections and imposing a one-party state. It endures by abolishing the distinction between civil society and the state, and by allowing nothing significant to occur which is not controlled by the Party. By studying the situation in Eastern Europe, I came quickly to see that political freedom depends upon a delicate network of institutions, which my friends were striving to understand and if possible to resuscitate. So what are these institutions? First among them is judicial independence. In every case where the Communist Party had an interest, the judge was under instructions to deliver the verdict that the Party required. It didn't matter that there was no law that the victim had breached. If necessary, a law could be invented at the last moment. If the Party wanted someone to be in prison, then the judge had to put that person in prison. If he refused, then he would end up in prison himself, if he was lucky. In such circumstances the rule of law was a complete fiction: law was simply a mask worn by the Party, as it dictated its decisions to the people. Attempts to bring democracy to Egypt have run into trouble. Then there is the institution of property rights. Normal people in the communist state had virtually nothing to their name - nothing legal, that is. Their houses or flats were owned by the state, their few personal possessions could not be freely traded in the market, and their salary and pension depended on their political conformity and could be removed at any time. In these circumstances the entire economy went underground. No court of law would enforce the contracts that people needed if they were to get on with their lives. You might have a deal with your neighbour to exchange vegetables for maths lessons. But if one of you defected and the other took the dispute to law, the only result would be that both of you went to prison for conducting an illegal business. All transactions therefore depended upon personal trust, in a situation in which trust was in shorter and shorter supply. Hence society was riven by conflicts and suspicions, which neither law nor politics could remedy. And the Communist Party rejoiced in this situation, since it prevented people from combining against it. George Bernard Shaw: "Democracy is a device that ensures we shall be governed no better than we deserve" Winston Churchill: "Democracy is the worst form of government, except for all those other forms that have been tried from time to time." Clement Atlee: "Democracy means government by discussion, but it is only effective if you can stop people talking" Tom Stoppard: "It's not the voting that's democracy, it's the counting" Then there is freedom of speech and opinion. The freedom to entertain and express opinions, however offensive to others, has been regarded since Locke in the 17th Century as the pre-condition of a political society. This freedom was enshrined in the US constitution, defended in the face of the Victorian moralists by John Stuart Mill, and upheld in our time by my dissident friends. We take this freedom so much for granted that we regard it as the default position of humanity - the position to which we return, if all oppressive powers are removed from us. But my experience of communist Europe convinced me of the opposite. Orthodoxy, conformity and the hounding of the dissident define the default position of [hu]mankind, and there is no reason to think that democracies are any different in this respect from Islamic theocracies or one-party totalitarian states. Of course, the opinions that are suppressed change from one form of society to another, as do the methods of suppression. But we should be clear that to guarantee freedom of opinion goes against the grain of social life, and imposes risks that people may be reluctant to take. For in criticising orthodoxy, you are not just questioning a belief - you are threatening the social order that has been built on it. Also, orthodoxies are the more fiercely protected the more vulnerable they are. And in 2009, Clive James argued liberal democracies are are the 'first and essential requirement for all countries of the world' Both those principles are surely obvious from the reaction of Islamists to criticisms directed at their religion. Just as it was in the wars of religion that ravaged Europe in the 17th Century, it is precisely what is most absurd that is most protected. And critics are not treated merely as people with an intellectual difficulty. They are a threat, the enemies of society and, for the believer, the enemies of God. So it was too under communism, in which a system of government had been built on theories that may have looked plausible in the early days of the industrial revolution but which in the post-war economy of Europe were palpably ridiculous. For that very reason it was the greatest heresy to criticise them. Finally, there is legitimate opposition. This was perhaps the greatest casualty of communism as it afflicted Europe. When Lenin imposed the communist system on Russia it was in the form of a top-down dictatorship, in which orders were passed down to the ranks below. It was a kind of military government, and opposition could no more unite against it than soldiers in the ranks can unite against their commanders. In times of emergency this kind of discipline is perhaps necessary. But it is the opposite of civilised government. It has been assumed in this country from the time of the Anglo-Saxons that political decisions are taken in council, after hearing all sides to the question, and taking note of the many interests that must be reconciled. Long before the advent of democracy, our parliament divided into government and opposition, and except in stressful periods during the 16th and 17th Centuries it was acknowledged that government without opposition is without any corrective when things go wrong. That is what we saw in the Soviet Union and its empire - a system of government without a reverse gear, which continued headlong towards the brick wall of the future. In the underground universities of communist Europe, my friends and colleagues studied those things, and prepared themselves for the hoped-for day when the Communist Party, having starved itself of every rational input, would finally give up the ghost. And the lessons that they learned need to be learned again today, as our politicians lead us forth under the banner of democracy, without pausing to examine what democracy actually requires.
Second, contrary to conventional wisdom, democracy is not a necessary condition for stable peace. Although liberal democracies appear to be better equipped to fashion zones of peace due to their readiness to institutionalize strategic restraint and their more open societies – an attribute that advantages societal integration and narrative/identity change – regime type is a poor predictor of the potential for enemies to become friends. The Concert of Europe was divided between two liberalizing countries (Britain and France) and three absolute monar- chies (Russia, Prussia, and Austria), but nevertheless preserved peace in Europe for almost four decades. General Suharto was a repressive leader at home, but after taking power in 1966 he nonetheless guided Indonesia toward peace with Malaysia and played a leading role in the founding of ASEAN. Brazil and Argentina embarked down the path to peace in 1979 – when both countries were ruled by military juntas. These findings indicate that non-democracies can be reliable partners in peace and make clear that the United States, the EU, and democracies around the world should choose enemies and friends on the basis of other states’ foreign policy behavior, not the nature of their domestic institutions.
In the last couple of decades there has been aburgeoning and intriguing discussion about the connection between democracy and war aversion.7 Most notable has been the empirical observation that democracies have never, or almost never, gotten into a war with each other. This relationship seems more correlative than causal,however. Like many important ideas over the last few centuries, the idea that war is undesirable and inefficacious and the idea that democracy is a good form of government have largely followed the same trajectory: they were embraced first in northern Europe and North America and then gradually, with a number of traumatic setbacks, became more accepted elsewhere. In this view, the rise of democracy not only is associated with the rise of war aversion, but also with the decline of slavery, religion, capital punishment, and cigarette smoking, and with the growing acceptance of capitalism, scientific methodology, women's rights, environmentalism, abortion, and rock music.8While democracy and war aversion have taken much the sametrajectory, however, they have been substantially out of synchronization with each other: the movement toward democracy began about 200 years ago,but the movement againstwar really began only about 100 years ago (Mueller 1989, 2004). Critics of the democracy/peace connection often cite examples of wars or near-wars between democracies. Most of these took place before World War I--that is, before war aversion had caught on.9 A necessary, logical connection between democracy and war aversion, accordingly, is far from clear. Thus, it is often asserted that democracies are peaceful because they apply their domestic penchant for peaceful compromise (something, obviously, that broke down in the United States in 1861) to the international arena or because the structure of democracy requires decision-makers to obtain domestic approval.10 But authoritarian regimes must also necessarily develop skills at compromisein order to survive, and they all have domestic constituencies that must be serviced such as the church, the landed gentry, potential urban rioters, the nomenklatura, the aristocracy, party members, the military, prominent business interests, the police or secret police, lenders of money to the exchequer, potential rivals for the throne, the sullen peasantry.11 Since World War I, the democracies in the developed world have been in the lead in rejecting war as a methodology. Some proponents of the democracy-peace connection suggest that this is because the democratic norm of non-violent conflict resolution has been externalized to the international arena. However,developed democracies have not necessarily adopted a pacifist approach, particularly after a version of that approach failed so spectacularly to prevent World War II from being forced upon them. In addition, they were willing actively to subvertor to threatenand sometimes apply military force when threats appeared to loom during the Cold War contest. At times this approach was used even against regimes that had some democratic credentials such as in Iran in 1953, Guatemala in 1954, Chile in 1973, and perhaps Nicaragua in the 1980s (Rosato 2003, 590-91). And, they have also sometimes used military force in their intermittent efforts to police the post-Cold War world (Mueller 2004, chs. 7, 8). It is true that they have warred little or not at all against each other--and, since there were few democracies outside the developed world until the last quarter of the twentieth century, it is this statistical regularity that most prominently informs the supposed connection between democracy and peace. However, thedeveloped democracies hardly needed democracy to decide that war among them was a badidea.12 In addition, they also adopted a live-and-let-live approach toward a huge number of dictatorships and other non-democracies that did not seem threatening during the Cold War--in fact, they often aided and embraced such regimes if they seemed to be on the right side in the conflict with Communism. Moreover, the supposed penchant for peaceful compromise of democracies has not always served them well when confronted with civil war situations, particularly ones involving secessionist demands. The process broke down into civil warfare in democratic Switzerland in 1847 and savagely so in the United States in 1861. Democracies have also fought a considerable number of wars to retain colonial possessions--six by France alone since World War II--and these, as James Fearon and David Laitin suggest, can in many respects be considered essentially to be civil wars (2003, 76). To be sure, democracies have often managed to deal with colonial problems peacefully, mostly by letting the colonies go. But authoritarian governments have also done so: the Soviet Union, for example, withdrew from his empire in Eastern Europe and then dissolved itself, all almost entirely without violence. Thus, while democracy and war aversion have often been promoted by the same advocates, the relationship does not seem to be a causal one. And when the two trends are substantially out of step today, democracies will fight one another. Thus, it is not at all clear that telling the elected hawks in the Jordanian parliament that Israel is a democracy will dampen their hostility in the slightest. And various warlike sentiments could be found in the elected parliaments in the former Yugoslavia in the early 1990s or in India and then-democratic Pakistan when these two countries engaged in armed conflict in 1999. If Argentina had been a democracy in 1982 when it seized the Falkland Islands (a very popular undertaking), it is unlikely that British opposition to the venture would have been much less severe. "The important consideration," observes Miriam Fendius Elman after surveying the literature on the subject, does not seem to be "whether a country is democratic or not, but whether its ruling coalition iscommitted to peaceful methods of conflict resolution." As she further points out, the countries of Latin America and most of Africa have engaged in very few international wars even without the benefit of being democratic (for a century before its 1982 adventure, Argentina, for example, fought none at all) (1997, 484, 496). (Interestingly, although there has also been scarcely any warfare between Latin American states for over 100 years or among Arab ones or European ones for more that 50--in all cases whether democratic or not--this impressive phenomenon has inspired remarkably few calls for worldwide Arab colonialism or for the systematic transplant of remaining warlike states to Latin America or Europe.) And, of course, the long peace enjoyed by developed countries since World War II includes not only the one that has prevailed between democracies, but also the even more important one between the authoritarian east and the democratic west. Even if there is some connection, whether causal or atmospheric, between democracy and peace, it cannot explain this latter phenomenon. Democracy and the democratic peace become mystiques: the role of philosophers and divines Democracy has been a matter of debate for several millennia as philosophers and divines have speculated about what it is, what it might become, and what it ought to be. Associated with these speculations has been a tendency to emboss the grubby gimmick with something of a mystique. Of particular interest for present purposes is the fanciful notion that democracy does not simply express and aggregate preferences, but actually somehow creates (or should create) them. In addition, the (rough) correlation between democracy and war aversion has also been elevated into a causal relationship.
HUNTSVILLE, Ala. — While the U.S. will fight it kicking and screaming, the dollar’s upcoming fall from its central global role will be a blessing all round.¶ The World Bank on Tuesday predicted that the dollar will lose its place by 2025 as the principle global reserve currency, to be supplanted by a multipolar world where it, the euro and the yuan will share top billing.¶ First off, things have come to a sorry pass when the dollar is going to lose out to two currencies of which one, the euro, many people worry may cease to exist, and the other, the yuan, isn’t even properly convertible.¶ But beneath the ignominy lies a simple truth: being the world’s main reserve currency is a bit like being a pop star; there are lots of fringe benefits but it is very easy to end up in financial rehab.¶ There are several supposed central benefits to being the world’s principal reserve currency; lower funding costs, a home-field advantage in financial intermediation and better control over one’s own monetary policy. All three have been a mixed blessing, at best, for the U.S. and may yet turn out to be mostly malign.¶ “Countries whose currencies are key in the international monetary system benefit from domestic macroeconomic policy autonomy, seigniorage revenues, relatively low borrowing costs, a competitive edge in financial markets, and little pressure to adjust their external accounts. It has also produced a potentially destabilizing situation in which (a) the world’s leading economy, the United States, is also the largest debtor, and (b) the world’s largest creditor, China, assumes massive currency mismatch risk in the process of financing U.S. debt,” according to the World Bank’s report titled “Multipolarity: The New Global Economy.”¶ “Another shortcoming of the current system is that global liquidity is created primarily as the result of the monetary policy decisions that best suit the country issuing the predominant international currency, the United States, rather than with the intention of fully accommodating global demand for liquidity,” it added.¶ Because people must buy dollars to make many financial transactions, and central banks choose to hold dollars as a store of value, the dollar is too strong, borrowing in dollars is too cheap and there are inadequate controls on unsustainable behavior such as running current account deficits.
Russia has just dropped another bombshell, announcing not only the de-coupling of its trade from the dollar, but also that its hydrocarbon trade will in the future be carried out in rubles and local currencies of its trading partners – no longer in dollars – see Voice of Russia¶ Russia’s trade in hydrocarbons amounts to about a trillion dollars per year. Other countries, especially the BRICS and BRCIS-associates (BRICSA) may soon follow suit and join forces with Russia, abandoning the ‘petro-dollar’ as trading unit for oil and gas. This could amount to tens of trillions in loss for demand of petro-dollars per year (US GDP about 17 trillion dollars – December 2013) – leaving an important dent in the US economy would be an understatement.¶ Added to this is the declaration today by Russia’s Press TV – China will re-open the old Silk Road as a new trading route linking Germany, Russia and China, allowing to connect and develop new markets along the road, especially in Central Asia, where this new project will bring economic and political stability, and in Western China provinces, where “New Areas” of development will be created. The first one will be the Lanzhou New Area in China’s Northwestern Gansu Province, one of China’s poorest regions.¶ “During his visit to Duisburg, Chinese President Xi Jinping made a master stroke of economic diplomacy that runs directly counter to the Washington neo-conservative faction’s effort to bring a new confrontation between NATO and Russia.” (press TV, April 6, 2014)¶ “Using the role of Duisburg as the world’s largest inland harbor, an historic transportation hub of Europe and of Germany’s Ruhr steel industry center, he proposed that Germany and China cooperate on building a new “economic Silk Road” linking China and Europe. The implications for economic growth across Eurasia are staggering.”¶ Curiously, western media have so far been oblivious to both events. It seems like a desire to extending the falsehood of our western illusion and arrogance – as long as the silence will bear.¶ Germany, the economic driver of Europe – the world’s fourth largest economy (US$ 3.6 trillion GDP) – on the western end of the new trading axis, will be like a giant magnet, attracting other European trading partners of Germany’s to the New Silk Road. What looks like a future gain for Russia and China, also bringing about security and stability, would be a lethal loss for Washington.¶ In addition, the BRICS are preparing to launch a new currency – composed by a basket of their local currencies – to be used for international trading, as well as for a new reserve currency, replacing the rather worthless debt ridden dollar – a welcome feat for the world.¶ Along with the new BRICS(A) currency will come a new international payment settlement system, replacing the SWIFT and IBAN exchanges, thereby breaking the hegemony of the infamous privately owned currency and gold manipulator, the Bank for International Settlement (BIS) in Basle, Switzerland – also called the central bank of all central banks.¶ To be sure – the BIS is a privately owned for profit institution, was created in the early 1930’s, in the midst of the big economic melt-down of the 20th Century. The BIS was formed precisely for that purpose – to control the world’s monetary system, along with the also privately owned FED and the Wall Street Banksters – the epitome of private unregulated ownership.¶ The BIS is known to hold at least half a dozen secret meetings per year, attended by the world’s elite, deciding the fate of countries and entire populations. Their demise would be another welcome new development.¶ As the new trading road and monetary system will take hold, other countries and nations, so far in the claws of US dependence, will flock to the ‘new system’, gradually isolating Washington’s military industrial economy (sic) and its NATO killing machine.¶ This Economic Sea Change may bring the empire to its knees, without spilling a drop of blood. An area of new hope for justice and more equality, a rebirth of sovereign states, may dawn and turn the spiral of darkness into a spiral of light
The US dollar has been functioning as the world reserve currency for several decades. However, its strength has been fading over the years. As we wrote in Research Shows ALL Paper Money Systems Failed, when the tie between the dollar and gold had been removed by President Nixon, he clearly stated: “Your dollar will be worth just as much tomorrow as it is today. The effect of this action is to stabilize the dollar.” Looking at the long term chart of the value of the dollar, it seems that those words were to be taken very, very literally. Since then, the dollar has been in a waterfall decline.¶ Although a world reserve currency does not give away easily, there are certainly enough signs of a structural change. Not only are the number of signs increasing, they are also becoming more structural. 2014 is probably not yet the year in which a dollar collapse will play out; it will for sure be a year in which we can expect a continuation of this deteriorating pattern.¶ The most important evolution lately is the increased effort from China to back away from the dollar. The Chinese are doing so in two different ways. First, the yuan is increasingly being used as the currency of exchange in trading agreements. Second, the People Bank of China is decreasing its dollar holdings.¶ Apart from that, the tensions between the US and Saudi Arabia are increasing. The importance of this is directly related to the petrodollar system, in which Saudi Arabia plays a fundamental role.¶ The Wall Street Journal had it spot on. In their newspaper of 12/4/13, an article stated that “very quietly, the use of the Chinese yuan in trade finance has overtaken the Euro and the yen, making the yuan the second-most used currency in trade finance.”¶ Moreover, the Shanghai Futures Exchange is preparing to price its crude oil futures contracts in yuan. According to Reuters, China overtook the United States as the world’s top oil importer in September and aims to make the yuan traded oil contract the benchmark in Asia. “China is the only country in the world that is a major crude producer, consumer and importer. It has all the necessary conditions to establish a successful crude oil futures contract.”¶ The People’s Bank of China is supporting these developments with adaptive monetary policies. Their policy makers recently made clear they will rein in dollar purchases that limit the yuan’s appreciation. The foreign-exchange reserves from China rose to $3.66 trillion in the third quarter of last year. That is a staggering amount, knowing that a major part of those holdings is in US dollars. “China’s holdings of Treasuries increased by $25.7 billion, or 2%, to $1.294 trillion in September, the biggest gain since February.” The Chinese central bank is committed to have less intervention and smaller gains in foreign-exchange reserves which does not bode well for dollar denominated US government debt. Source: Bloomberg.¶ Obviously the US is responding to this threat, as Finian Cunningham from Press TV explained. Recent military tensions between the two countries in the East China Sea is superficially over China’s unilateral declaration of an air defense zone. “But the real reason for Washington’s ire is the recent Chinese announcement that it is planning to reduce its holdings of the US dollar,” he wrote.¶ The petrodollar system is one of the most important indicators to watch in order to gauge the timing of the collapse of the US dollar. According to Jim Rickards, the petrodollar system is now collapsing for two reasons:¶ The US has abused its privileged reserve currency position by printing trillions of dollars in an effort to create inflation. More recently, President Obama has taken steps to anoint Iran as the regional hegemon of the Middle East, and to ease the way, in stages, toward Iran’s possession of nuclear weapons capability. This is viewed as a stab-in-the-back by the Saudis and the Israelis and will lead quickly to Saudi Arabia obtaining nuclear weapons from Pakistan.¶ Ron Paul added to this that the Saudis are furious at what they perceive to be the US not holding up its part of the petrodollar deal. He says:¶ The Saudis believe that as part of the US commitment to keep the region safe for the monarchy, the US should have attacked their regional rivals, Syria and Iran, by now. This would suggest that they may feel that they are no longer obliged to uphold their part of the deal, namely selling their oil only in US dollars. The Saudis have even gone so far as to suggest a “major shift” is underway in their relations with the US.¶ Several countries tend to strengthen each other in an attempt to evade the international petrodollar system. Saudi Arabia, Israel, Egypt, and Russia are among those countries. Increasingly, they are setting up their deals in other currencies, including gold.¶ Confidence is the basis of the dollar based world reserve currency. Each sign of loss of confidence will be critical in the deterioration of the dollar’s leading role.¶   Going forward, according to Ron Paul, we should particularly watch for the relationship between the US and Saudi Arabia. The Saudis, with their unprecedented language towards the US, could become a turning point. As soon as we hear US officials talking about the “need” to transform the monarchy in Saudi Arabia into a “democracy” it could really mark the end game.¶ Other signs to watch for include a Gulf Cooperation Council central bank, a BRICS multilateral bank, the increasing use of the yuan, a regional ruble zone on the Russian periphery and the creation of a true Eurobond backed by the full faith and credit of all members of the European Monetary System. Rickards says that, while no one of these developments is decisive, each one of them represents an alternative to the dollar for a specified set of transactions. “Cumulatively these developments could push the dollar past a tipping point, where it collapses suddenly and unexpectedly after an initially slow decline.”
"You don't create miracles by throwing money at something--that's never been the case," Bravo said. "It's not like you'll wake up one morning and Bill Gates has funded a project that saved the Earth." Many of today's green-technology entrepreneurs and investors have come from the IT industry, where the pace of change has been rapid and relentless. But the major energy transitions that happened in the past--from wood to coal, for example--took decades. Expecting energy to operate at the same pace as Moore's Law and the world of bits and bytes is misguided, said Elisabeth Moyer, assistant professor of atmospheric science at the University of Chicago. "There's been a lot of excessive techno-optimism based on people's experience with information technology. It's just not that way in energy. You're constrained by the laws of physics," Moyer said during a talk. "It's going to be big, hard, expensive, and slow. There's really no way around it." What are your options? The Obama administration made clean-energy investments a big part of the economic stimulus package and continues to make energy research a priority through a number of initiatives. The ARPA-E agency, for example, is tasked with placing bets on breakthrough energy technologies in areas such as energy storage and recycling carbon dioxide from power plants. High-profile investor Vinod Khosla, who manages a $1 billion green-technology fund, regularly argues that people underestimate the impact of technology innovation. Khosla chases potential game-changing ideas, such as Calera, which has a process for making cement using waste carbon dioxide, and Kior, a start-up that is testing a process to make bio-gasoline from wood. "A better way to forecast the future is to invent it because it's been proven that extrapolating the past doesn't work," Khosla said at the ARPA-E Summit in March. Bill Gates, meanwhile, has invested in TerraPower, a company pursuing a nuclear reactor design that would use spent fuel from other nuclear power plants, allowing it to operate for decades without fueling. Speakers on the energy panel at EmTech yesterday advocated for more technology research and development in renewable energy, biofuels, and carbon capture and storage. But they made clear that the immediate future will continue to be dominated by hydrocarbons and that all energy sources, including renewable energy, come with tradeoffs and costs. Looking for a clean-energy home run (photos) View the full gallery ExxonMobil, for example, has a research and development projectwith Synthetic Genomics to make liquid fuels from genetically engineered strains of algae. But algae production takes huge amounts of water. Making a modest amount of oil from algae--about 150,000 barrels per day--would require all the water that Mexico City consumes in a day, said Shell's Bravo. Solar, which accounts for less than 1 percent of power generation in the U.S., is more expensive than wind for making electricity. However, both require large amounts of land to do a very large scale and are intermittent, which makes managing reliability of the grid more complicated, said John Reilly, associate director for research at MIT's Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change. Storage on the grid can help shore up wind and solar, but high costs mean it will be used relatively little--mainly for providing short periods of power under an hour, he said. The developed world can and should use energy more efficiently, but overall usage around the globe is certain to go up in the coming decades as the developing world uses more energy to raise its standard of living, panelists said. Nuclear power, which is seeing a surge of construction in China, costs about twice what a pulverized coal plant does, Reilly said. "As soon as you look at something that looks like a silver bullet, you see that it's tarnished and not moving as fast as you thought," he said.
Financial capital is an essential part of innovation without which risks cannot be taken and breakthrough solutions cannot be achieved. GHG reduction will require multiple solutions and multiple sources of financial capital – from research funding to pilot projects to product manufacturing. Governments have allocated significant amounts of money to find solutions that will contribute to meeting GHG reduction goals. However, the total dollars needed to implement these solutions is far greater than the funding currently available. Current literature suggests that there are a number of financial barriers to the development and deployment of clean energy technologies. These include: Clean energy technologies are not cost competitive with fossil fuel energy sources – while progress has been made in bringing down the cost of some “clean” technologies (e.g., solar, onshore wind) virtually all of the technologies are more costly than conventional sources. The Venture Capital mismatch – investment horizons for venture capital firms do not match the development timeframes for complex clean technology developments (up to 10 years for new device concepts); in most cases, VC’s investments have a timeframe on the order of only three years before exiting. Substantial Capital Requirements – The capital requirements to advance the clean technology industry are huge. Given the current level of technology risk and the challenges associated with private finance noted above, governments will have to play a role in catalyzing the market, including providing significant funds. 
In its conference room is a large chart showing the declining cost of electricity produced by solar panels over the last three decades. The slightly bumpy downward-­sloping line is approaching a wide horizontal swath labeled "grid parity"—the stage at which electricity made using solar power will be as cheap as power generated from fossil fuels. It is the promised land for renewable power, and the company, 1366 Technologies, believes its improvements in manufacturing techniques can help make it possible for solar power to finally get there. It's an ambitious target: even though silicon-based photovoltaic cells, which convert sunlight directly to electricity, have been coming down in price for years, they are still too expensive to compete with fossil fuels. As a result, solar power accounts for far less than 1 percent of U.S. electricity production. And 1366 founder Emanuel Sachs, who is the company's chief technology officer and an MIT professor of mechanical engineering, says thateven though solar might be "within striking distance" of natural gas, existing solar technology won't be able to compete with coal. "To displace coal will take another level of cost reduction," says Sachs. That's where 1366's breakthrough comes in. The company is developing a way to make thin sheets of silicon without slicing them from solid chunks of the element, a costly chore. "The only way for photovoltaics to compete with coal is with technologies like ours," he says.The problem, however, is that we are probably not just a few breakthroughs away from deploying cheaper, cleaner energy sources on a massive scale. Though few question the value of developing new energy technologies, scaling them up will be so difficult and expensive that many policy experts say such advances alone, without the help of continuing government subsidies and other incentives, will make little impact on our energy mix. Regardless of technological advances, these experts are skeptical that renewables are close to achieving grid parity, or that batteries are close to allowing an electric vehicle to compete with gas-powered cars on price and range. In the case of renewables, it depends on how you define grid parity and whether you account for the costs of the storage and backup power systems that become necessary with intermittent power sources like solar and wind. If you define grid parity as "delivering electricity whenever you want, in whatever volumes you want," says David Victor, the director of the Laboratory on International Law and Regulation at the University of California, San Diego, then today's new renewables aren't even close. And if new energy technologies are going to scale up enough to make a dent in carbon dioxide emissions, he adds, "that's the definition that matters." Not surprisingly, Gross's solution is based on software. Large solar thermal plants cost more than a billion dollars to build, and one reason for the high cost is that tens of thousands of specially fabricated mirrors have to be precisely arranged so that they focus the sunlight correctly. But what if you used plain mirrors on a simple metal rack and then used software to calibrate them, adjusting each one to optimize its position relative to the sun and the central tower? It would take huge amounts of computing power to manipulate all the mirrors in a utility-scale power plant, but computing power is cheap—far cheaper than paying engineers and technicians to laboriously position the mirrors by hand. The potential savings are impressive, according to Gross; he says that eSolar can install a field of mirrors for half what it costs in other solar thermal facilities. As a result, he expects to produce electricity for approximately 11 cents per kilowatt-hour, enticingly close to the price of power from a fossil-fuel plant.Still, it's not good enough—at least in the United States, where natural-gas plants can produce power for around 6 cents per kilowatt-­hour.
Over at National Journal’s National Security Experts blog, this week’s question focuses on the recently released Hadley-Perry “alternative QDR.” Sydney J. Freedberg Jr. of NationalJournal.com asks: The U.S. military is already unaffordable – and yet it needs to be larger to sustain America’s global leadership, especially in the face of a rising China. That’s the bottom line from a congressionally chartered bipartisan panel, co-chaired by Stephen Hadley, George W. Bush’s national security adviser, and William Perry, Bill Clinton’s Defense secretary. The report, released July 29, is the independent panel’s assessment of and commentary on the Pentagon’s own Quadrennial Defense Review, released earlier this year. Frequent expert blog contributor Gordon Adams, among others, has already blasted the Hadley-Perry report for making the underlying assumption that the U.S. can and should continue to invest heavily in being a “global policeman.” Is Adams right that the Hadley-Perry report calls for an unaffordable answer to the wrong question? Or are the report’s authors correct when they argue that the U.S. must be the leading guarantor of global security? And if the U.S. must lead, has the Hadley-Perry panel laid out the right path to doing so? My response: Dan Goure says that U.S. military   preeminence is not unaffordable. That is probably correct. Even though we spend in excess of $800 billion annually on national security (including the cost of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the Departments of Homeland Security and Veterans Affairs) we could choose to spend as much, or more, for a while longer. We could choose to shift money out of other government programs; we could raise taxes; or we could continue to finance the whole thing on debt, and stick our children and grandchildren with the bill. But what is the point? Why do Americans spend so much more on our military than does any other country, or any other combination of countries? Goure and the Hadley-Perry commissioners who produced the alternate QDR argue that the purpose of American military power is to provide global public goods, to defend other countries so that they don’t have to defend themselves, and otherwise shape the international order to suit our ends. In other words, the same justifications offered for American military dominance since the end of the Cold War. Most in Washington still embraces the notion that America is, and forever will be, the world’s indispensable nation. Some scholars, however, questioned the logic of hegemonic stability theory from the very beginning. A number continue to do so today. They advance arguments diametrically at odds with the primacist consensus. Trade routes need not be policed by a single dominant power; the international economy is complex and resilient. Supply disruptions are likely to be temporary, and the costs of mitigating their effects should be borne by those who stand to lose – or gain – the most. Islamic extremists are scary, but hardly comparable to the threat posed by a globe-straddling Soviet Union armed with thousands of nuclear weapons. It is frankly absurd that we spend more today to fight Osama bin Laden and his tiny band of murderous thugs than we spent to face down Joseph Stalin and Chairman Mao. Many factors have contributed to the dramatic decline in the number of wars between nation-states; it  is unrealistic to expect that a new spasm of global conflict would erupt if the United States were to modestly refocus its efforts, draw down its military power, and call on other countries to play a larger role in their own defense, and in the security of their respective regions. But while there are credible alternatives to the United States serving in its current dual role as world policeman / armed social worker, the foreign policy establishment in Washington has no interest in exploring them. The people here have grown accustomed to living at the center of the earth, and indeed, of the universe. The tangible benefits of all this military spending flow disproportionately to this tiny corner of the United States while the schlubs in fly-over country pick up the tab. In short, we shouldn’t have expected that a group of Washington insiders would seek to overturn the judgments of another group of Washington insiders. A genuinely independent assessment of U.S. military spending, and of the strategy the military is designed to implement, must come from other quarters.
But the conventional wisdom obscures as much as it reveals. Specifically, the declinists overlook the inconvenient truth that global power is relative. And comparing America’s year to that of our present and potential adversaries paints an interesting picture: 2011 was not the year when the United States fell off the wagon. Instead, a look back at the past 12 months suggests that U.S. power is more resilient than the narrative of inevitable decline portrays. Take Al Qaeda, our most consistent adversary (by their definition and ours) since the 9/11 attacks. Despite some severe missteps, we have in 10 years degraded Al Qaeda’s capabilities to the point that they are having difficulty mounting attacks against significant targets. In 2011, the United States killed Al Qaeda’s most effective propagandist, Anwar al-Awlaki; its operating chief, Atiyah Abd al-Rahman; and of course its founder, chief executive and spiritual leader, Osama bin Laden. Moreover, the Arab Spring undercut the notion that political change in the Middle East requires the violent jihad that Bin Laden spent his career espousing. The fight against extremist Islam is an impossible one in which to declare success. Yet the fact remains that while Al Qaeda began the War on Terror with a horrific assault on the foremost symbols of U.S. economic and military power, it leaves 2011 effectively leaderless, rudderless and reduced to boasting about kidnapping defenseless U.S. aid workers. Iran’s leaders also exit 2011 in worse shape than they entered it. Early in the year, they viewed the demise of Middle Eastern potentates as accelerating their rise to regional dominance. Turkish anger over the Mavi Marmara incident continued to draw Ankara closer to Tehran. Saudi anger at the perceived lack of U.S. support for Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak seemed to threaten a permanent rupture in the U.S. relationship with a key ally, and Iran assumed that it would be the beneficiary of declining American influence in the Arab World. But the Arab Spring has unfolded very differently. Iran’s closest, most vital, and in some ways only Arab ally, Syria’s Bashar al-Assad, ends the year leading an embattled, isolated regime facing a combination of civil war and economic sanctions that his government is unlikely to survive. Iran’s relationship with Turkey has deteriorated sharply, and, along with Saudi Arabia, Ankara has in fact drawn closer to the United States. Indeed, the nascent U.S.-Turkey-Saudi troika is one of the most important but least noticed trends of the past few months. Combined with another year without nuclear weapons — the program apparently thwarted significantly by covert operations — and a tightening vise of economic sanctions, these events have left Iran’s leaders disoriented. After years of growing consensus, Iran’s elites are now increasingly fragmented and at one another’s throats. Moreover, Tehran spent the past few months engaged in a stunning series of blunders: plotting with Mexican drug dealers to assassinate the Saudi ambassador to the United States and allowing regime supporters to storm the British Embassy in Tehran, the combination of which has re-energized global efforts to squeeze Iran financially. The assumption that Iran is the emerging regional power has shattered. China, which most of the declinists identify as America’s greatest future rival, has likewise had a difficult 2011. With U.S. willingness to lead receding, the international spotlight has fallen on Beijing. And on every issue — the euro zone crisis, climate change and rebalancing the global economy — China has declined to take the lead, to criticism and dismay at home and abroad. Beijing has failed to reconcile rising domestic nationalism with assuaging its neighbors’ increasing alarm over Chinese economic sustainability and strategic hegemony. China’s miscalculations in Northeast and Southeast Asia have allowed the United States to reassert traditional alliances in the region (with Japan and South Korea), establish new beachheads (placing a permanent U.S. Marine Corps presence in Australia), and create a process and institutions (the Trans-Pacific Partnership) for a balanced Asia–Pacific regional architecture, rather than one dominated by the Middle Kingdom. Compared to this, 2011 has not been a bad year for America. It is a stretch to call the Iraq war a victory, but the endgame in the Afghan quagmire is slowly coming into focus. And for all our fiscal problems, global funding has to flow somewhere, and our capital markets are still unparalleled. China won’t internationalize the renminbi, the euro is fragile and gold is not a country. As a result, the dollar remains the world’s reserve currency, and U.S. Treasury bills the global financial safe haven.
The question of terrorism has also become a difficult one for states to deal with using international law, particularly as targets become increasingly international. Some steps have been taken to address these issues. A number of conventions have been created to deal with issues ranging from aircraft hijacking to hostage-taking and abductions, but all suffer from lack of enforcement. Part of the difficulty in dealing with terrorism is a general lack of consensus over what groups and tactics would fall under such law. The law, however, still largely reflects an overly state-centric view that makes it difficult to deal with the growth of transnational groups. Taking action against groups often requires infringing on sovereignty, another core principle of international law.
Although much of this discussion has portrayed international law as a potential means of conflict management or resolution, it should be remembered that law is itself a source of significant conflict. The shape and content of law often favors particular groups or countries. Not only is international law often most influential when it favors the strongest, but the powerful are also typically the source of law. For example, because much of international law is formed by the U.N., the Security Council has a disproportionate influence in shaping it. One prominent example of might makes right in international law is in the realm of laws related to trade and investment. Enforcement comes largely through power, which means that the developed world often controls the agenda. They have the market power to punish and entice smaller states to comply. The creation of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1995 marked a dramatic advancement in the development of trade law and enforcement mechanisms over what existed under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The WTO has been widely criticized for "green room"[8] agenda-setting by the global North, and other actions that put the South at a disadvantage.[9] New laws also create significant administrative burden for poor states, which is perhaps not bad for the long run, but makes for costly compliance.[10]
International law has also been criticized as fundamentally Western. Certainly, most international law is based on Western notions. One sign of this might be that the Western Countries are more compliant with the international laws on human rights.[13] Others argue, however, that the widespread acceptance of international law is evidence that the principles on which it is based are not strictly Western. Still, it is not clear that many developing countries are entirely free to accede to these rules, as the WTO example above suggests. Western countries are able to provide incentives for less powerful countries to accede to their wishes. Either way, however, it means that international law has at least some force behind it, though not nearly as much as domestic legal systems.
A serious lack of human capital, coherent national science and technology strategies, and research infrastructures in potentially partnering countries was identified by some workshop participants as an important barrier to more effective international engagement. Gebisa Ejeta and others stated that weak human capacity, in part owing to brain drain, and the lack of adequate research infrastructure in developing countries has too often derailed promising science-based developments or worse, prevented their successful exploitation. Ejeta also underlined the differences in goals and aspirations between institutions in the United States and those in developing countries that often create an awkward dialogue about the objectives of collaborative partnerships. Most of the advanced research institutions in the developed world aim at creating a global public good; in contrast, research centers in most developing countries focus on the development of locally needed products and services. Nevertheless, he believed that the two goals are mutually supportive, and if the parties communicate and work together, a win-win scenario often can be reached. He also noted an overreliance in developing countries on external funding to capitalize on science diplomacy and global science cooperation opportunities, which is, of course, largely because of insufficient local resource commitment to science. There is a shortage of functional research centers and science support architecture such as science and technology commissions merit-based funding mechanism, or science academics in the developing world. Several participants identified building such structures as an important goal of science diplomacy.
Using science for diplomatic purposes has obvious attractions and several benefits. But there are limits to what it can achieve.
The United States and China have recently been called upon to exercise more leadership in developing an effective international  policy response to climate change, but without giving attention to either the risks inherent in taking on such a role or the mechanism by which leading can mobilize others to act in response. Here, I understand leadership as action by a sufficiently powerful actor in a cooperative scheme that is capable of triggering reciprocal actions by followers on behalf of that scheme, and argue that such leadership can be coaxed by potential followers through pledges of reciprocal action that are made conditional upon prior action undertaken by a leader. In the context of the current international impasse over post-Kyoto climate change mitigation commitments, I identify means by which leadership by the U.S. or China might be induced by such conditional pledges, potentially allowing some obstacles to international collective action on climate change mitigation to be overcome. With the failure of the international community to negotiate a successor treaty to the Kyoto Protocol in late 2011, and with little prospect of U.S. ratification of any treaty framework that includes binding greenhouse emission targets, hope for a sustainable and effective international climate policy appears dim. As of 2012, only Australia, New Zealand, and the European Union continue to endorse binding post-Kyoto greenhouse emissions targets, with countries representing half the emissions controlled under Kyoto rejecting any further binding mitigation commitments in the absence of a treaty framework that includes the United States. Further, the remaining commitments are likely to be tested by political and economic turmoil that strains the ability of the governments to maintain them. While the "roadmap" that emerged from the seventeenth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP-17) of the 1992 UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)--held in Durban, South Africa--calls for a post-Kyoto treaty to be negotiated by 2015 and to take effect by 2020, ongoing reluctance by China, India, and the United States to accept binding emissions caps threatens to frustrate  progress toward any such future agreement. Given the rapidly closing window of opportunity to begin reversing current trends of increasing global emissions and to eventually stabilize atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases at levels that would prevent the dire consequences predicted by "business as usual" trajectories, significant mitigation action remains urgently needed, with climate change adaptation programs becoming increasingly important. As observers have noted, this stalemate in international policy development  shifts the onus to ground-up rather than top-down actions, including policy at the national and subnational domestic level as well as private actions undertaken by civil society actors. In the near future policy leadership may be widely diffused, residing with nongovernmental organizations, private corporations, and local communities, rather than with states. Such efforts can affect larger emissions trends at the margins, but to solve the problem itself an international policy framework is still needed. As others have stressed in recent exhortations  for more leadership from such  key actors as the United States, in order to bring about such a framework the disparate and competing interests that have thus far produced only an international climate policy impasse must be aligned through the exercise of effective leadership. 1My aim here is to explore the decision structure from which such leadership might potentially emerge and from which a fair and effective climate policy framework might gain requisite international support. In what follows, I identify several conditions for and obstacles to effective international policy leadership with a view toward creating the conditions for that leadership to emerge, and suggest how such an overtly strategic analysis might address some key unexplored territory in climate ethics. First, I sketch the nature and role of leadership in international climate policy negotiations, defining leadership as the ability to induce action by other parties, and to subsequently generate further and reciprocal action by followers. Next, I analyze the current decision structure related to national action on climate change, showing how leadership might help to overcome resistance to cooperation. I then suggest the use of conditional promising as a means for inducing climate policy leadership by either the United States or China. By transforming the decision structure from one in which the exercise of such leadership carries high risks and promises few rewards into one with lower risks and higher probabilities of success, this approach casts leadership as an essential element for mobilizing international cooperation in protecting the climate system. Rather than viewing such leadership as a spontaneous and persuasive power that need only be summoned by would-be leaders and is thus independent of actions by potential follows, this approach understands leadership as a power to trigger cooperation that in some cases can be induced by pledges of reciprocal action. Rethinking Leadership The impasse over the main terms of an effective international climate policy agreement can be understood in part as having resulted from a failure of leadership. Although the UNFCCC called on developed countries to "take the lead" in combating climate change, the United States in particular has  shirked that commitment, refusing even to follow other signatory nations in accepting   binding mitigation targets, let alone to lead them in doing so. In advance of the 2007 COP-13 meetings in Bali, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called on the United States and China to "play a more constructive role" in climate policy negotiations. 2The results of the 2008 U.S. presidential elections gave many people renewed hope that America might finally eschew the climate policy obstructionism that characterized the George W. Bush administration. Awarding President Obama the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize, the Norwegian Nobel Committee remarked that "the USA is now playing a more constructive role in meeting the great climatic challenges the world is confronting." However, the renewed effort at multilateral diplomacy for which Obama was recognized never materialized. The president's late-hour effort to salvage a deal from the 2009 COP-15 meetings resulted in the Copenhagen Accord, which abandoned multilateral diplomacy for an end run around the established UNFCCC process and generated a nonbinding pledge that includes no binding targets. Surely, this was not the leadership that the secretary-general had called for or that the Nobel Committee had anticipated. Even if potential leaders such as the U.S. president had  acted differently, an effective international policy may not have emerged. It is also unclear that others could have made a difference, had they been in the relevant leadership positions. My aim is not to scrutinize recent policy history or impugn particular actors as having failed to lead, except insofar as this might yield insights into how such leadership might emerge in the future. Rather, attributing ongoing disagreements over international climate policy to a failure of leadership trades on the definition of leadership itself, which involves inducing others to act in ways to which they are not currently inclined or to accept policy terms toward which they are not currently disposed, and introduces what I call theproblem of leadership. As explained below, the problem arises when cooperative action by some potential leader becomes necessary for securing the reciprocal cooperation of others, but the prospects for that exercise of leadership are affected by potential followers. Apart from the terms of an effective and presumably fair international climate policy framework capable of gaining the assent of the world's nations and their governments, my aim here is to explore how the powers related to leadership can sometimes be used to overcome policy divisions, as well as the role that leadership might potentially play in securing such an agreement.
President Barack Obama’s State of the Union address illustrated what a dead letter federalism is among Democrats. Not that further illustration was necessary. Federalism holds that the national government should limit itself to things of truly national scope. Things that are primarily of local concern should be left to state and local governments. Federalism was a big deal to the founders. They wanted an energetic national government, but one that was confined to enumerated national functions. The founders also envisioned a bright line between the federal and state governments, each sovereign within their own spheres. We are a long way from that. Today, the Democratic Party sees virtually nothing as outside the purview of the federal government. The Republican Party talks a good game about federalism, but usually ends up undermining the principle when it acquires national power. Today, the lines between the federal government and state and local governments are hopelessly blurred. The federal government spends over $600 billion a year on grants to state and local governments. Arizona state government receives more in federal funds than it raises in general-fund taxes. Today, state governments operate principally as service delivery mechanisms for federal social-welfare programs. This means that there is no real political accountability for the programs, which is why they grow and function like a blob.
Recent decisions from the Supreme Court delivered a one-two punch to American federalism. While media focus on the political impact of the immigration and healthcare decisions on the elections, our constitutional system is reeling from a blow of greater proportion. In the first high-profile decision, Arizona substantially lost its battle to maintain a state immigration enforcement system. The dispute arose from the gap between what the feds say and what they do, specifically the failure to police immigration to the satisfaction of Arizona taxpayers. The decision in Arizona v. United States was mostly about federal preemption of state law. And preemption law is notoriously fuzzy: “eye of the beholder” unfortunately characterizes the Court’s approach. The majority saw the Arizona case as an instance of Congress so thoroughly “occupying the field” that no room remained for state law. Justice Thomas, in a concise dissent, reasoned that Congress had not precluded state law such as Arizona’s, which merely echoes federal law. Whatever one thinks of Justice Scalia’s dissent, he got the facts right. The difference between majority and dissenter perceptions turns in part on whether the President’s inaction in enforcing federal immigration law has preemptive significance. And certainly, as Scalia wrote, the Framers would have abhorred this result; the states always have cherished their borders. One columnist wryly noted that the Framers would not have signed a constitution abolishing slavery. True, but that deficiency of our Constitution was addressed through amendment. No amendment yet has erased state borders. Preemption always poses a fuzzy question, but the Court’s ruling against Arizona takes a bite out of state power. Expansive federal inaction was read to displace a traditionally sound exercise of state police power that only sought to complement federal law—as written. The states now seem more than ever at the mercy of the federal government and its deep pockets to decide what is and is not the province of the state electorate. So what local policy decisions will next take up residence between Capitol Hill and K Street? Healthcare, it seems. In NFIB v. Sebelius, the Court substantially upheld the national healthcare initiative advanced by the President, including the controversial individual mandate. The Court majority rejected the mandate as an exercise of Commerce Clause power. But leaving academic jaws agape, the majority capitalized on a marginal, throw-it-at-the-wall-and-see-if-it-sticks Government argument that the penalty for failure to comply with the mandate was not a penalty at all—rather, a tax within the power of the Taxing Clause (as well as the Sixteenth Amendment, a further flimsy stretch). The majority’s use of the Taxing Clause dealt another blow to federalism. Again pundits derided the dissent, this time for getting hung up on the infamous hypothetical of government-compelled broccoli consumption and stubbornly failing to acknowledge that the individual decision not to buy health insurance (inaction again) is itself a regulable commercial act. The problem of federalism can get lost in the shuffle. But in using the Taxing Clause, the Court offered precious little in the way of limiting principles. Indeed, the Taxing Clause now seems poised to become Congress’s favorite new toy to run circles around the Commerce Clause and its carefully erected barriers to federal omnipotence. Whatever mandates formerly defied the reach of Congress may now be offered to individuals as a “choice,” and persons lacking the wisdom to choose correctly may be “taxed” accordingly. Congress need not even use the word “tax”; the Justices will strain their eyes to find a tax wherever a penalty lies. Citizens refusing to buy their shares of broccoli admittedly seems far-fetched. Imagine instead a domestic airline industry on the brink of collapse. A federal bailout compels all persons to buy airline tickets—or to invest in troubled banks, or to subscribe to failing newspapers—it’s the patriotic choice, after all. Agoraphobic? Prefer to keep money under the mattress and get your news from TV? No problem; the “tax” on non-compliance comes due April 15. Federalism is not an anachronism. The “United States” has—have—survived because of a well drawn balance between sovereign states and the federal government. This system of “vertical separation of powers” is one of our essential checks and balances, right along with the three branches of government (“horizontal separation of powers”) that kids learn about in grade school. Imbalance in this formula can spell catastrophe; think Civil War or European financial collapse. Immigration and healthcare are critical public policy problems, but they are not intractable. Congress and the President have ample constitutional power at their disposal to achieve meaningful reforms without running roughshod over the States. Dismantling federalism is a shortcut with a steep price.
It is clear that, at least in some circumstances, the advantages of decentralized policy making outweigh its costs. That does not mean, however, that federalism can usefully be instituted and maintained as a matter of constitutional law enforceable by courts. Discussions of federalism often focus on the national and state governments being assigned separate "spheres" of power by the Constitution, with each being supreme in its own sphere. The reality, however, is that divided supremacy is an oxymoron. (4) Policy making power is not a physical object that can be divided into non-overlapping parts. Virtually everything in the real world has some connection to or impact upon everything else. The federal government cannot have full power over interstate trade, for example, if the states have full power over intrastate trade, which competes with and otherwise affects interstate trade. The Constitution deals with this problem by providing that when federal and state regulations conflict, as they often and inevitably do, the federal regulation prevails. (5) It is the federal government, therefore, that is the true sovereign, and, as American historyamply illustrates, the scope of its ultimately unchecked sovereignty has consistently expanded over time and will almost certainly continue to do so in the future.
I have two points to make about the relationship between economics and foreign policy. The first is to distinguish between the domestic economic and domestic political constraints on power; and the second is to argue for a new conceptual approach to the integration of politics and economics. Political Constraints on American Power Let’s begin with the first issue, the distinction between domestic economic constraints and domestic political constraints. The first has to do with the economic resources available to the U.S. government relative to those of other political units, economic growth rates, and the fiscal sustainability of the underlying growth models. The second has to do with the degree to which the political system can translate those resources into effective foreign and security policies. The latter might be thought of as a kind of discount rate applied to the former, and that discount rate varies for different political entities. Many of the discussions of American “decline” (or lack thereof) have failed to distinguish between the underlying economic base and the political discount rate. I believe that American society is not in decline because the overall situation of the economy is relatively strong, but that the political system has been subject to considerable decay. Of the major political actors in the world today, the political discount rate is probably highest for the European Union (EU). The EU as a whole is somewhat larger in population and total gross domestic product (GDP) than the United States (though not in per capita terms), and it has had some success in turning that economic power into political outcomes (for example, in exporting its policies on genetically modified organisms, or GMOs, to Africa). But overall (and by design), it lacks a sufficiently hierarchical decision-making structure that can delegate power and resources to an executive. It is hard for the EU to be a strong unitary actor. This is the most true in foreign and defense policy, where its inability to stabilize the Balkans in the 1990s or prevent the United States from invading Iraq in 2003 were widely recognized. But this lack of political decisiveness also extends to economic policy, where the European Central Bank (ECB) has significantly weaker powers and autonomy than the United States Federal Reserve. China’s discount rate, by contrast, is relatively low, since it is ruled by a relatively disciplined Communist Party that brooks no internal dissent. There have been some questions raised about the Party’s control over the People’s Liberation Army (PLA), but no real evidence that this amounts to a serious problem. China’s underlying economic power has been exaggerated, but has grown quickly and is rapidly being turned into political influence in East Asia. The political discount rate for the United States has historically been higher than for the EU, but lower than China’s. I would argue that the rate has been increasing in recent years, meaning that America’s usable power is lower than its potential capacity. I do not believe that there are any fundamental short- to medium-term economic constraints on America’s ability to remain the world’s dominant power. The American economy has finally returned to growth on the back of a domestic energy revolution, and is poised to achieve perhaps 3% growth in 2014. America’s debt-to-GDP ratio peaked at over 12% in 2009 (including federal, state, and local), but has fallen this past year to 6%, and according to the CBO will fall to 4% next year. The real deficit problems lie further down the road, when our aging population and health care costs will force the ratio up again by the early 2020s. The long-term deficit problem is a very big and serious one, but it can only be solved through entitlement reform, and not on the back of cuts in discretionary spending (which includes the defense budget). If we fail to take on the entitlement problem, then yes, defense and foreign policy will be heavily constrained—but cutting the defense budget preemptively to solve the anticipated deficit problem strikes me as a foolish strategy because it will not deal with the real problem. However, I do believe that the political discount rate that translates economic strength into internationally usable power has increased for the United States as a result of the political polarization in Washington. Here the problem lies more with the political elite and less with society. I am not sure whether there are significantly deeper polarizations in American society than previously on foreign policy issues the way there are on domestic economic and cultural issues. After two expensive wars in the Middle East, both parties have become more cautious in their support for intervention and a muscular foreign policy. The Republican Party for the first time in two generations has seen the appearance of a significant isolationist wing under the leadership of politicians like Senator Rand Paul. Even on a sensitive issue like National Security Agency (NSA) surveillance there is no Republican-Democrat polarization; rather, the cleavages run through both parties. What is different now is a much more poisonous partisan atmosphere in Washington, which sees virtually any policy issue as an arena for political combat and point-scoring. This means that Congress is much less willing to delegate discretion to the executive branch on foreign policy, and makes the president in turn preemptively cautious in exercising power. There are two recent cases of this: the murder of Ambassador Stevens in Benghazi and the current negotiations on a nuclear deal with Iran. As suggested by the recent Senate report, the Obama administration made numerous mistakes in the actions leading up to Ambassador Stevens’s death, but these tended to be errors of judgment by middle-ranking officials (including perhaps the ambassador himself), and not by Hillary Clinton or President Obama. The administration was guilty not of a cover-up, but of trying to spin the incident to minimize damage in an election campaign. Nonetheless, politicization of this event has consumed Washington for half a year, discouraged any risk-taking with regard to Middle East policy, and reinforced the already excessive emphasis on self-protection and diplomatic security as the first priority of U.S. regional policy. Similarly, the bill currently before the Senate setting forth in great detail the terms that any final nuclear agreement with Iran would have to meet is an unhelpful infringement on the executive branch’s discretionary powers. It is hard to see how any complex negotiation could ever be completed when Congress lays down so stringent a bottom line. This of course does not mean that the administration should be given a blank check; Congress will have to approve any agreement that eventually emerges, since many of the existing sanctions are legislatively imposed. But this is a very poor way to proceed in a negotiation. The net effect of political polarization has been to shift control over foreign policy back from the president to Congress in much the same manner as in arguments over Vietnam in the 1970s and Central America in the 1980s. This reduces executive discretion and increases the effective political discount rate. New Approaches to the Integration of Economics and Politics A second issue is a conceptual one concerning the way that we think about the relationship of economic and political policy. From the Reagan years on, the United States has been the foremost proponent both of economic liberalism (often dubbed “neo-liberalism”) in the global economy and of democracy in the political sphere. The two were seen as working hand in glove, both as intrinsically good objectives and ones that would be mutually supportive. The economic part of the agenda took the form of the Washington Consensus, a series of liberalizing measures to lower tariff barriers and push for a global free-trade system, privatization, deregulation, and a general cutting back of state sectors. Economic liberalization along Anglo-American rather than continental European lines was seen to be supportive of the promotion of liberal democracies around the world. Liberalization would lead to economic growth, which would produce larger middle classes, which in turn would be more critical of authoritarian governments. Economic freedom was seen as part of a package of liberal political rights. The policy of promoting both economic liberalization and greater democracy succeeded to a great extent. Formerly closed economies like those of the former Communist countries in Eastern Europe, China, India, and many developing countries were opened up to the global economy. Global output quadrupled between 1970 and the 2008 financial crisis, largely as a result of this liberalization. Although democracy has not so far swept all the major economies, the number of electoral democracies around the world went from about 35-40 to more than 100 today.
However, this particularly American approach to integrating economics and politics had real limitations, and since the first warning signs at the time of the 1997 Asian financial crisis, has gotten into increasing trouble. There were two critical weaknesses in the economic liberalization agenda. The first was the fact that liberalization works much better in the real economy than in the financial sector. In the late 1990s, there was almost universal consensus among economists that freer and more globally integrated financial markets would lead to more efficient capital allocation and thus higher growth. However, it turned out that global financial markets are not necessarily efficient; they are subject to bubbles, manias, and irrational exuberance, whose costs are ultimately borne by taxpayers. Much of the apparent growth during the 2000s was illusory and based on excessive bank risk-taking. Countries such as Mexico, Thailand, and South Korea quickly got into trouble after they followed American advice and opened up their capital accounts in the 1990s. Those countries that did not liberalize, like China, found themselves protected from the damaging impact of volatile hot money. The United States was hoisted by its own petard when it dismantled the Glass-Steagall regulatory regime in the late 1990s and opened itself up to a wave of liquidity washing in from China and other emerging markets. All of this facilitated the financial crisis of 2008 and led to the most serious recession since the Great Depression. The second weakness was distributional. As Michael Spence’s article indicates, the combination of globalization and unfettered technological advance has had some rather unfortunate distributional consequences. America and other advanced democracies have undergone a prolonged period of deindustrialization, as manufacturing employment has stagnated, along with the incomes of many working-class Americans. In the meantime, highly educated Americans have seen massive increases in their incomes, together with a similarly cosmopolitan global elite. During the 1990s and 2000s, the United States lost a great deal of its manufacturing base and supply chains to China and other countries in Asia. This was partly the inevitable result of capital’s search for higher returns, but it did not have to take as extreme a form as it did. Under the rubric of fighting protectionism, the United States passively stood by as China undervalued its currency and moved U.S. jobs to China. The economists insisted that we not mix political goals with economic efficiency considerations, while our rival was doing just the opposite. The early phases of this liberalizing period were good for global democracy, as middle classes spread across the developing world. Perhaps someday this will lead to pressures for the democratization of China. But it has had a potentially negative impact on democracy in the developed world, and in the United States. With increasing recognition of the fact of unequal development has come populist pushback against those elites who have profited from globalization. At the moment, none of this populism has undermined the stability of democracy in the developed world. But in the end, unequal distribution of the fruits of economic growth is likely to erode the legitimacy of democratic systems. The problem as I see it is to define a different way of integrating economics and politics that avoids the exuberant neo-liberalism of the 1990s, while at the same time avoiding a return to growth-undermining populist or redistributive policies. No one to date in the United States or Europe has clearly articulated what such a model would be. It would have to dethrone growth as the single measure of the performance of the economy and raise the priority of employment and even distribution. It would have to define a new, larger role for the state, particularly in the regulation of financial markets. It would need to focus on middle-class employment, and perhaps consider ways of channeling innovation into labor-utilizing innovation. It would explicitly target preservation of a manufacturing base and keeping supply chains geographically close to the United States. Internationally, definition of such a model will be important in maintaining American leadership and “soft power.” Because of Wall Street’s failures, the neo-liberal model has been discredited around the world, and countries such as Brazil and Argentina are falling back into bad habits with regard to industrial policy and subsidization. The United States needs to figure out how to modify its neo-liberal model, owning up to past excesses but preserving the core of an open international order. Free trade and deregulation cannot be our only goals; indeed, re-regulation of the international banking sector is a critical requirement if we are to avoid another financial crisis of the sort we suffered five years ago. But neither domestic stability nor the projection of soft power abroad will be possible without a different approach to economic policy.
For presidents, like sports-team managers, the tough weeks tend to outnumber the jubilant. But even by the standards of an unforgiving job, Barack Obama could be forgiven for feeling unusually buffeted of late. Many of the blows have come on the domestic front, with the all-consuming stand-off of the government shutdown segueing into frantic efforts to defend and repair the roll-out of Obamacare amid charges of fatal technological incompetence. But if he were tempted to seek solace in the autonomy of foreign policy – as modern presidents have been wont to do – there has been little consolatory triumph to be found. In August and September, he was caught in a mighty tangle over Syria, threatening military strikes over its chemical weapons use before being hamstrung first by Britain’s refusal to join the charge and then by the reluctance of his own Congress. The legacy of that mess continues to work itself out in unpredictable ways, such as increasingly public tensions between the United States and Saudi Arabia, hitherto one of its more solid allies. Though the eventual Russian-orchestrated deal to remove Syria’s chemical weapons was a respectable one given the circumstances, the episode as a whole spoke of an America straining to translate its power into influence, or to maintain, a united front among its friends. Now the rolling scandal over National Security Agency (NSA) surveillance, triggered by the mass leak of secrets by Edward Snowden, has entered another phase of intensity, this time centered on Europe. Revelations that the US tapped the phone of German Chancellor Angela Merkel, operated numerous “listening posts” on European soil, and sucked up vast quantities of communications data from millions of citizens across Europe have broken in the press. Public expressions of displeasure have been forthcoming, including a European Union statement. Taken together, these vignettes of public dissension will be enough to make many ask the question: Is the US losing its influence even over its allies? Is this just a tricky moment for a particular president, or is it a harbinger of a broader trend? First, the necessary caveats: Enduring alliance relationships resemble long marriages, in that the mere presence of moments of strain, or even audible arguments, cannot be taken as evidence of imminent separation. Looking back over the longer-term history of America’s relations with its allies, episodes such as the Vietnam War, the “Euromissile” crisis of the 1980s, and the controversial interventions in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s demonstrate that sharp differences of opinion and conflicting priorities are no radical, new state of affairs. And however unhappy they may be with their recent treatment, it is not obvious that countries such as Germany, France, or Saudi Arabia have anywhere to go if they did decide the time had come to tout for alternative alliance partners. It is not entirely clear how European annoyance might manifest in ways that have practical importance. It is true the Europeans have it in their power to threaten progress on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership process, but it is not clear that such an action would harm the US more than Europe itself. In short, even if they are disgruntled, necessity may ultimately prove a sufficient force to help them get over it. The reason present friction between the US and its allies carries greater weight, however, is that it arises in the context of a global shift in power away from the US and its established allies and toward new powers. The prospect of “American decline” in terms of relative international power is the focus of a great deal of debate over both substance and semantics. But the central fact is that even the part of the US’s own intelligence apparatus charged with long-term foresight regards it as established that, within 20 years, the world will have transitioned from the “unipolar” American dominance of the first post-cold war decades to a world in which multiple centers of power must coexist. The center of economic gravity has already shifted markedly toward Asia during the last decade. This certainly does not mean any single new power is about to rise to replace the US as a hegemonic force. Nor does it mean the US will be going anywhere: The scale of its existing advantages across a range of fronts – military, economic, institutional – is sufficiently great that it is assured a prominent place at the table of whatever order may come. What it does mean is that Americans must presently be engaged in thinking carefully about how best to leverage their advantages to retain the maximum possible influence into the future. If they cannot continue to be first among equals in managing the world order, they will wish at least to ensure that order is one that runs in line with their own established preferences. Soft power Many of those who are optimistic about the ability of the US to pull off this project of declining power without declining influence place emphasis on two things: the extent to which the US has soft power due to widespread admiration for its political and cultural values, and the extent to which it has locked in influence through the extent of its existing networks of friends and allies. Even if these advantages cannot arrest America’s decline on harder metrics, if played properly, they can mitigate its consequences and secure an acceptable future. Shoring up support from like-minded countries such as those of Europe ought to be the low-hanging fruit of such an effort. So the current problems do harm on both fronts. It will be difficult to maintain the allure of soft power if global opinion settles on the view that American political discord has rendered its democracy dysfunctional at home, or that its surveillance practices have given rein to the mores of a police state. And it will be harder to preserve American status through the force of its alliances if its politicians' economic irresponsibility (for example, publicly contemplating a default on American national debt) or scandals over surveillance or drone strikes alienate their public or cause their leaders to question the extent to which they really are on the same side as the US.
U.S. foreign policy is failing. Russia is pushing into Ukraine and threatening Eastern Europe; China is bullying Japan, the Philippines, and Vietnam in the East and South China seas; and terrorist groups in the Middle East and Africa are displaced from one place, only to multiply and create more lethal threats in others. Since the end of the Cold War, both Democratic and Republican administrations have in varying measure premised policy on the notion that economic incentives and other soft power can cultivate peaceable democracies throughout the world and friendly societies adhering to Western liberal values. The United States and Western Europe have offered China, Russia, and developing countries access to markets, investment, foreign aid, and technical cooperation, but, in many places, those have yielded few results other than to finance threats to our common security. China remains an authoritarian regime led by an oligarchy—the Communist Party—with a poor human rights record. Its superior economic performance, greatly assisted by trade with the United States, and the material gains enjoyed by its citizens virtually ensure the Party’s continued grip on power. Beijing, however, sees American influence in the western Pacific as a threat and is actively challenging U.S. naval superiority. Russia President Vladimir Putin and his loose coalition of oligarchs appear to be more interested in restoring a lost empire and amassing wealth at the top than genuinely improving the lot of ordinary citizens. They are happy to sell natural gas to Europe to finance those ambitions, but don’t count on international commerce to make Russia a benign actor. If the United States doesn’t match China’s navy and Russia’s army with resources and forceful actions when challenged, those rivals will prevail in their regional ambitions. Still President Obama is correct to warn flexing military muscle is not a stabilizing solution everywhere, especially the Middle East and Africa. Perhaps Iraq best epitomizes the dilemmas terrorism poses. If the United States provides air support or puts troops on the ground to defend Baghdad, it may halt the advance of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), but it can’t defeat it. The ISIS is a curious hybrid of a terror organization and a brutal organized army that can hold territory and potentially topple a government, but does not regularly mass forces that can be destroyed in the field by a Western army. If stymied, its fighters will simply move to other conflicts, like the civil war in Syria. Western democracies long ago assigned religion a subordinate role. The state claims sovereignty from citizen consent, not by appealing to divine right. For many Muslims, religion and state legitimacy are inseparable, and throughout the Middle East and Africa, many are willing to die to destroy democratic governments that could subordinate the authority of Islam to secular governments. And ethnic rivalries are often cast in terms of religion. Without democratic institutions that place individual freedoms above religion, it is hard to see how competing claims of historically conflicting ethnic groups can be resolved and civil wars ended, and animus toward the West and acts of terror stopped. Neither economic engagement by the West nor American foreign aid can change those facts on the ground. Radical Islam is premised on widely held ideas, and ideas are tough to destroy with armies. In the end, the United States must recognize it is in for a long slog fighting terrorism in the Middle East and Africa. No amount of national building and economic aid will change that, but sometimes it can make matters worse. Sadly, armies and navies still trump economics. Americans will have to pay the price or face menacing threats to their security at home and interests abroad.
President Obama and his administration appear to recognize the need to bolster the authority and legitimacy of the United States in the world. But virtue alone cannot provide credible guarantees against future US opportunism. Unipolarity is an enabling condition that persists. The problem of credibility is structural, and not one that a new administration can solve simply by a new style or approach to foreign policy. Ironically, to safeguard its authority requires that the United States embed its coercive capabilities even deeper into multilateral institutions that can provide real checks on potential opportunism.
Turmoil in the Middle East is and has been at fever pitch the past five years. Iran, Iraq, Libya and Syria come to mind. The U.S. diplomacy efforts notably have failed to resolve any of these situations. Our staunchest ally in the region, Israel, is basically left hanging by a thread with rockets streaming in from Gaza, and the threat of a nuclear Iran grows ever closer, and yet we rebuke Israel when they rightly attack those responsible. We impose sanctions on Iran only until they start to take effect, and then we begin to remove them. Elsewhere in the world, Vladimir Putin has rebuffed and "punked" President Barack Obama repeatedly over his takeover of eastern Ukraine and the shooting down of the Malaysian airliner. Our feeble, tepid response is to send MREs (ready-to-eat meals) to Ukraine. The one crisis our president can resolve is the one on our southern border, but again he fails to act effectively. Let history reflect the Obama administration for what it is, the "Do Nothing" administration.
Almost four years since the beginning of the Great Recession, signified by the implosion of the financial industry and the fall of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, the United States is recovering. In fact, some sectors have grown to new heights. Thus, a “declining USA” is no more than a myth. This myth is likely to continue for a while despite the recession officially ending in June 2009 as the high unemployment and on-going foreclosure crisis have cloaked significant economic improvements. In the last four years, declinism and declinists have been spreading paralyzing dystopian analyses. Combine this with Nouriel “Dr. Doom” Roubini’s “the perfect storm” forecast in 2013 and you probably would become even more paralyzed. Daniel Gross’ best-selling book Better, Stronger, Faster released in May 2012 is an exception. It is probably one of the first books that presents encouraging facts in this recovery period rather than discouraging views of America’s future. The mammoth has gotten back up, but it is always the memory of one’s fall that lingers in mind. We all remember that one fateful day when we attended the 341(a) bankruptcy hearing to meet creditors and not the thousands of days of financial stability. Just like we all remember vividly the day our loved one was buried six-feet under when he died and not the beautiful decades he shared his life with us. Failure and losing hurt, thus they are recorded for eternity in our long-term memory. It is just how our brain works, thanks to millions of years of evolution. The world was so shocked with the fall of USA, that its gradual rise hasn’t yet created a lasting mental image. Good news, American “soft power” is more powerful than any fiscal policy and political maneuver. Joseph Nye of Harvard University Kennedy School of Government says “soft power” refers to the ability to get through attraction rather than coercion or payments. By “to get” it means to receive favorable treatments based upon attractiveness of a country’s culture, ideals, and policies. For instance, inspired by TV series about medical doctors, some children in Taiwan aspire to study medicine at an American university. Infatuated by the idea of a fair trial, an Indonesian dissident aspires to become a lawyer. “Soft power” can be hardcore power. And the American brand is still the best out there. Also, thanks to low US dollar value, a record 62 million foreign tourists visited USA in 2011. In 2010, some 1.04 million immigrants applied for permanent residency, following 1.13 million in the previous year, which reflects the world’s insatiable faith in the US brand. The people of the world still believe that the USA is the place to visit, to reside, and to prosper. US brands, such as automobile giants Buick, GM, and Ford, continue to grow outside of the USA. US brands continue to influence socio-political-economic wellbeing of people of the world: Facebook, Twitter, and Youtube are vital in demonstrations and social unrests. US brands continue to serve people’s mobility and communication: Apple, Microsoft, CISCO, Oracle, and Boeing. People of the world is a market of seven-billion, and most of them have occasionally consumed black soda drinks called Coca-Cola and Pepsi. The US government has lost its geopolitical epicenter, yet American brands keep the legend alive. And the shift has occurred from public power to private power, from political power to economic power, from hard power to soft power, with the end of the Cold War as the turning point. The recent approval of the JOBS Act in April 2012 may as well pick up where the failure of previous policies have left, as its intention is creating an encouraging environment for growth of startup companies through more efficient and lenient procedures of capital raising, including crowdsourcing, venture capitalizing, and angel investing. And it is expected that every new investment would create at least six new jobs. I can see the greatness of American brands supported by the JOBS Act creating another shift in economic recovery, as once again a policy is providing a conducive environment for growth, just like when Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 was repealed by Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act in 1999. Now the question is: How far will the JOBS Act’s ripple effect go? And which direction does it go? North or south? Growth, stagnation, or decadence? Still, I believe in the power of “USA” as a brand and American brands. The world loves us.
The Obama Doctrine’s first term has been a remarkable success. After the $3 trillion boondoggle in Iraq, a failed nation-building mission in Afghanistan, and the incessant saber-rattling of the previous Administration, President Obama was able to reorient U.S. foreign policy in a more restrained and realistic direction.
With regard to teachers, the line of argument is that there are too few math and science teachers and that they are not as well prepared as they should be. In Maryland in 2005, there was apparently “a gap between qualified teachers lost and qualified teachers gained . . . in sciences like physics and chemistry,” as well as in math (Wedekind, 2006). Many reports offer accounts of the dwindling pool of teacher talent in math and science—because of, for example, higher earnings potential, more attractive compensation systems, and better working conditions in the private sector (Business Roundtable, 2005; President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, 2004). The National Academy of Sciences (2006) report states: “[M]athematics and science teachers are, as a group, largely ill-prepared,” teaching out of field and without full certification.
Yet the debate in the United States continues to focus on graduating ever greater numbers of scientists and engineers as the key to increasing U.S. competitiveness. While we must continue to improve standards and encourage more students to study science and engineering, we need to acknowledge that we will never win the race to produce the highest test scores or the most engineers. Simple demographics dictates that we will never outproduce China in engineers. But that does not mean that America’s innovation capacity is doomed. The best test-takers do not always make the best innovators, and a range of countries with high test scores—such as Japan, Singapore, Korea, and China—are increasingly worried that their educational systems stress conformity at the expense of creativity. The challenge is not to train the most scientists and engineers but to train the scientists and engineers (and artists and anthropologists and managers) who are best able to work within the global innovation system to create valuable new products and services.
CAMBRIDGE, MASS. — Voices of both those convinced that China will eclipse the United States as a global economic and military power and those who are confident of continued US leadership are getting louder. Much of this debate focuses on the size of the Chinese economy relative to the US economy or issues of military might. But what matters for global leadership is innovation, which is not only the key driver of per capita income growth but also ultimately the main determinant of military and diplomatic leadership. It was the US that proved after Pearl Harbor how a prosperous economy can rapidly increase its military power and preparedness when push comes to shove. So the right question to ask is not who will be the military leader of the next century, but who will be the technological leader. The answer must be: most probably the US – but only if it can clean up its act. The odds favor the US not only because it is technologically more advanced and innovative than China at the moment, with an income per capita more than six times that of China. They do so also because innovation ultimately depends on a country’s institutions. Inclusive political institutions distribute political power equally in society and constrain how that power can be exercised. They tend to underpin inclusive economic institutions, which encourage innovation and investment and provide a level playing field so that the talents of a broad cross-section of society can be best deployed. Despite all of the challenges that they are facing, US institutions are broadly inclusive, and thus more conducive to innovation. Despite all of the resources that China is pouring into science and technology at the moment, its political institutions are extractive, and as such, unless overhauled and revolutionized soon, they will be an impediment to innovation
The United States accounts for 40 percent of the total world's spending on scientific research and development, employs 70 percent of the world's Nobel Prize winners and is home to three-quarters of the world's top 40 universities. An inflow of foreign students in the sciences -- as well as scientists and engineers from overseas -- has helped the United States build and maintain its worldwide lead, even as many other nations increase their spending on research and development. Continuing this flow of foreign-born talent is critical to helping the United States maintain its lead, according to the study. "Much of the concern about the United States losing its edge as the world's leader in science and technology appears to be unfounded," said Titus Galama, co-author of the report and a management scientist at RAND, a nonprofit research organization. "But the United States cannot afford to be complacent. Effort is needed to make sure the nation maintains or even extends its standing." U.S. investments in research and development have not lagged in recent years, but instead have grown at rates similar to what has occurred elsewhere in the world -- growing even faster than what has been seen in Europe and Japan. While China is investing heavily in research and development, it does not yet account for a large share of world innovation and scientific output, which continues to be dominated by the United States, Europe and Japan, according to RAND researchers. However, other nations are rapidly educating their populations in science and technology. For instance, the European Union and China each are graduating more university-educated scientists and engineers every year than the United States. Policymakers often receive advice from ad hoc sources. Although their viewpoints are valuable, they should be balanced by more complete and critical assessments of U.S. science and technology, said report co-author James Hosek, a RAND senior economist. The absence of a balanced assessment can feed a public misperception that U.S. science and technology is failing when in fact it remains strong, even preeminent.
As with other countries, U.S. economic growth, increase in standard of living, and S&T progress depend on the United States’ ability to absorb (make economic use of) recent innovations made at home or abroad. The rise of R&D and innovation activity in other nations suggests that the pool of technology created outside the United States may be growing and that the United States is likely to benefit from increased productivity from technology invented abroad. There is no reason to believe that the globalization of S&T and the rise of other nations impacts the United States’ capability to absorb new technology directly, as this capability is to a large extent determined by private sector know-how, business incentives, consumers’ willingness to try new technologies, and the legal and regulatory framework. Some technology applications do not require much S&T capacity, or much knowledge of S&T within the user community or the general public. For example, solar collectors or filters for water purification can significantly enhance the productivity of workers in a developing country without the need for them to understand how these devices work. But many technology applications do require S&T capacity (see Silberglitt et al., 2006a, 2006b). The S&T capacity of advanced countries, including an educated and technically astute workforce and public, is the reason why they are highly capable of implementing new technology, and why developing nations such as China and India have partial capability, but are well ahead of Latin America, the Middle East, and Africa in this regard.
A second, perhaps more interesting, difficulty with the prophylactic approach is that it may rely on a too judicialocentric view of the workings of government that exaggerates the Court's role in the separation-of-powers struggle. Professor Redish's argument rests on the notion that it is vitally important that the Court get its separation-of-powers jurisprudence right. The argument runs something like this: Separation of powers is a bulwark of liberty - without it, the individual protections of the Bill of Rights are nothing but paper. The Court defines separation-of-powers law. If it messes up, then so much for liberty. The Court is bound to mess up if it adopts anything other than a prophylactic approach to separation of powers. It is therefore urgent that the Court adopt this approach. Fortunately, the Framers' design is probably stronger than this argument presupposes. Separation-of-powers gives each branch tools which enable ambition to counteract ambition. The Court gets to decide cases. It justifies its decisions with opinions which the other branches and the citizenry generally follow as authoritative. Thus, although the Court does not have guns or money, it has words. These words are the Court's tools in the separation-of-powers struggle. Any time the Court writes an opinion on separation of powers, it self-consciously uses its particular power to shove the boundaries of branch power - sometimes to profound effect, as a simple hypothetical illustrates. Suppose Chief Justice Marshall had ended Marbury v. Madison with the following paragraph: Then again, Congress has just as much right to interpret the Constitution as I do - perhaps even more, because Congress is the branch closest to the people, and it is the people's Constitution. I was just kidding about that judicial review stuff. History would be very different, partially because such a result in Marbury would have grossly undermined the Court's future ability to compete in the separation-of-powers struggle successfully. On a more general level, Supreme Court opinions on any topic can affect the balance of branch power. For instance, the Supreme Court can undermine its authority by producing poorly reasoned opinions - or, much worse from a realpolitik point of view, unpopular opinions. The power, however, of any given decision to damage a Court staffed by relatively sane Justices is probably limited. This is an institution that has survived Dred Scott and Plessy v. Ferguson. Of course, the other branches also shove at the boundaries of branch power - FDR's Court-packing plan being one notable example of this practice. Sometimes the law of unintended consequences grabs hold. Perhaps the Court-packing plan concentrated the Justices' minds on finding ways to hold New Deal legislation constitutional, but it also blew up in FDR's face politically. At least for the last two hundred years, however, no branch has managed to expand its power to the point of delivering an obvious knock-out blow to another branch. Seen from this broader perspective, cases such as Morrison, Bowsher v. Synar, and Mistretta v. United States surely alter the balance of branch power at a given historical moment, but do not change the fundamental and brute fact that the Constitution puts three institutional heavyweights into a ring where they are free to bash each other. Judicialocentrism tends to obscure this obvious point because it causes people to dwell on the hard cases that reach the Supreme Court. The power of separation of powers, however, largely resides in its ability to keep the easy cases from ever occurring. For instance, Congress, although it tries to weaken the President from time to time, has not tried to reduce the President to a ceremonial figurehead a la the Queen of England. Similarly, Congress does not make a habit of trying cases that have been heard by the courts. This list could be continued indefinitely. The Supreme Court has had two hundred years to muck about with separation-of-powers doctrine. Over that time, scores of Justices - each with his or her own somewhat idiosyncratic view of the law - have sat on the bench. Scholars have denounced separation-of-powers jurisprudence as a mess. But the Republic endures, at least more or less. These historical facts tend to indicate that the Court need not rush to change its approach to separation of powers to prevent a slide into tyranny.
Even in the "peacetime" years between the Cold War and the Global War Against Violent Extremist Terrorists (or whatever the heck it’s called these days), America suffered under Clinton’s very real despotism, in such obvious instances as Waco, which undoubtedly had its operational precedents set at wartime. The drug war, too, with all its militaristic precursors, has hardly been called off, and our liberties only suffer more each day on that sad front as well. As Robert Higgs has explained, most famously in his brilliant work Crisis and Leviathan, crises and especially wars lead to a "ratchet effect": Government grows in size and power, ostensibly as it "responds to existential threats" (as Krauthammer would put it), but then it does not retract all the way when the crisis ends. Instead, government is more powerful than it was before the crisis began, although not quite as tyrannical as it was during the hysterical, crisis-induced stampede toward collectivism.
The challenges for advocates of the balance-of-power conception are also substantial. Defenders of this conception must do no less than provide content to the conception where none now exists. Adherents must be able to articulate what is meant by balance; they must provide some way of measuring and comparing the quantum of power possessed by government institutions and, likewise, provide and defend a benchmark against which to measure whether an arrangement would upset that balance. Perhaps as a substitute to that seemingly impossible task, defenders of this conception must identify how tension and competition among the departments is created and maintained. Only when that work is completed will courts be able to assess whether an arrangement would dangerously dilute tension and competition.
Sometimes this defense of separating functions is presented (like Currie's formulation) as being about preventing arbitrary government action. Other times the idea is the same, but it is unveiled in different vocabulary: Separated functions are a way to check and balance the exercise of power, to limit factions, or to promote deliberation. The coordination thesis does not work as a justification for institutional separation of functions. On one reading, the thesis is just a variation on the argument that government power should be dispersed. The insight is that a single institution should not control all governmental power; to avoid that, the system provides three different authoritative decision-makers. As just demonstrated, however, dispersing political power does not require that power be classified into three categories and assigned to separate institutions. To disperse power, there must be more than one authoritative decision-maker, but institutional separation of government functions is not necessary. Arbitrary action can be guarded against by requiring that three institutions--all engaged in the same function called lawmaking--concur before liberty or property is taken from an individual. It might be logical or convenient to say those institutions are exercising different types of power. But classification of government power into three categories and dispersal of it among different institutions does not play a distinctive role in this understanding.
The original stealth weapons, submarines may be second only to unmanned systems in the degree to which they have exploited new technology in the past two decades. Major advances have included air-independent propulsion (AIP) systems, increasing submerged endurance and mobility; automation, reducing crew size (and consequently, life-cycle costs) and improving habitability; electro-optical masts that can sweep the horizon with high-definition in seconds and drop out of sight; and new torpedoes and other weapons. On the near horizon is the the mating of SSKs with unmanned air and underwater vehicles (UUV). One of the newest SSK designs in the world is the TKMS/Kockums A26, in development for the Swedish Navy and due to become operational late in the decade. The 1,800-ton A26 builds on experience with the Gotland class—which proved a headache for the U.S. Navy during two years of “aggressor” operations out of San Diego—and likewise uses Stirling-cycle AIP propulsion, with a submerged endurance of up to 18 days. (Kockums AIP technology is also used on Japan's 16SS.) New features include a low radar-cross-section sail, an integrated tube-type “multimission portal” for swimmers and UUVs, and what the builder calls Genuine Holistic Stealth Technology (Ghost), giving the A26 lower sonar signatures across all bands than the Gotland. For example, noise and vibration isolation techniques are improved, including damping plates between hull frames. Airflow speeds in ducts are limited and cable and pipe turn radii are above set minima. The A26 has new features such as a smart degaussing system that uses external sensors to match the boat's magnetic signature to its background. It will be operated by a crew of 26. TKMS' Howaldtswerke-Deutsche Werft (HDW) unit in Kiel, Germany, is also leading a two-year, $100 million upgrade of the Israeli navy's three Dolphin submarines at Israeli shipyards. Dolphin, Leviathan and Tekuma will be joined by two more subs, enhanced with AIP, under construction at HDW, while acquisition of a sixth is being negotiated. The upgrade includes 10 launchers per boat for Rafael's Torbuster, a fourth-generation, hard-kill decoy that seduces incoming torpedoes using technology based on the Rafael's decoys for surface ships. Upon detection of an incoming torpedo, the sub releases the decoy from an external launcher, which propels itself to a safe distance before attracting the incoming torpedo by transmitting acoustic signals, using reactive acoustic deception. Torbuster actively engages the torpedo as it closes in, activating an explosive warhead when the target is at the closest proximity, inflicting sufficient damage to the torpedo to neutralize it. The system is operated from a single console, a launcher control unit. The operator is able to monitor the decoys in the launchers, to follow and activate the launchers, and to control the system's safety interlocks and devices. Another element of the upgrade is Rafael's Sea-Com, a hardened, secure, Internet protocol-based communications suite integrating internal voice, data and video communications, as well as external radio and satellite links. Sea-Com reduces sensor-to-shooter time through efficient collaboration of multidisciplinary systems and real-time access to information resources. Russia's Project 636 SSK, called Kilo in the West, set standards in the Cold War, but its designer—St. Petersburg-based CDB Rubin—is now playing catch-up after years of underinvestment. Rubin's general director, Andrey Dyachkov, tells DTI that the company is completing bench-testing of a prototype AIP system. The system is a hydrogen fuel cell, as used by TKMS-HDW, but instead of operating on stored hydrogen, it relies on chemical re- formation of the sub's diesel fuel, which eliminates special on-board tankage and hydrogen infrastructure on shore. According to Dyachkov, this technology has already been validated during AIP bench tests. “This allows us to use the standard diesel fuel and doesn't require complex ground support” compared to the German variant, he explained. Rubin plans to install AIP in the Amur 1650, offered for the Indian navy's tender for six conventional submarines. An export version of Russia's Project 677 Lada class, Amur has a surface displacement of 1,765 metric tons, submerged speed of 19 kt. and a crew of 35. It is designed to strike both sea-based and fixed land-based targets. The 66-meter (217-ft.) boat carries six torpedo tubes and Klub-S (SS-N-27) missiles in 10 vertical launchers that can be fired in salvos. For the Indian tender it also will be equipped with Russo-Indian PJ-10 BrahMos supersonic missiles fired from the same launchers. The AIP can be installed in the Amur 1650 in a separate module along with the conventional diesel-electric propulsion system. Using the AIP, the sub's endurance can increase by two or three more weeks from 45 days currently, based on a customer's request. Continuous submerged time increases from the current nine days to 14-20 days. The first Project 677 boat, the St. Petersburg, is undergoing reliability testing with the Russian navy in the Baltic Sea. In 2012, it is expected to complete the testing of its sonar system, says Dyachkov. The Admiralty Shipyards in St. Petersburg are constructing two more, the Kronstadt and Sevastopol, but so far there are no funds for completing these with AIP. Rubin plans to further increase Amur 1650 endurance by replacing lead-acid batteries with lithium-ion (Li-Ion) batteries. The designers do not report about their progress in this field, but say that lithium-ion batteries will be able to increase the sub's submerged endurance and distance by 50% at low noise patrol speed and threefold at full speed. Unlike the AIP, which is only compatible with the Amur, the new batteries can also be offered for Rubin's Project 636 Kilo boats. Li-Ion batteries are a key feature of another radical new submarine, under development since 2008 by South Korea's Agency for Defense Development (ADD)—the new-technology 510-ton KSM-500A mini-sub. South Korea has two 150-ton Dolgorae-class minis for special operations and ASW training, but as plans for a replacement have evolved, the requirements have expanded. From the outset, the new sub was intended to attack large surface units, and initial plans were for a 15-kt. speed, 2,000-nm range and two weeks of submerged endurance. The ADD explained that the speed was the minimum required to escape from a counterattack after firing torpedoes at major surface units, and the range covers operations into the coastal waters of potential adversaries. For underwater endurance, the ADD called for more than two weeks. Then, the March 2010 sinking of the corvette Cheonan by a North Korean torpedo—most likely from a Yono-class midget submarine—brought the small-sub concept into the spotlight as a possible counter to the North's 70-strong sub fleet. The latest concept, the KSM-500A, unveiled in October 2011, is even faster and has a three-week endurance. It carries six torpedoes—two 533-mm heavies to attack surface ships and four 324-mm lightweights to target submarines—plus a payload interface module that can hold missiles or mines. The craft is designed to carry 10 crew and up to seven combat swimmers. The notable feature of the KSM-500A design is its propulsion, which is all-electric. By dispensing with diesel generators and relying on Li-Ion batteries with more than twice the energy density of lead-acid ones, the KSM-500A will both be “ultra-quiet” and able to sprint for greater distances above 10 kt. than current small submarines, the ADD claims. Packaging a motor, rotor, stator and propellers into an integrated motor-propulsor eliminates the drive shaft and makes room in the aft compartment for a payload module, while a flank-array sonar can extend over almost the whole length of the hull because there is no noisy machinery in the aft section. The KSM-500A concept is not yet frozen and a hybrid system, comprising an AIP unit and Li-Ion batteries, is still an option. While lethality, survivability and mobility are still the focus of most design efforts, DCNS, the French military shipyard, recently completed the world's first study on the environmental impact of a submarine's life-cycle, seeking innovative ways to reduce this impact. Eric Fusil, the study's leader, tells DTI that “in general when you improve the environmental impact your product also becomes more efficient in terms of functionality and cost. This has been the case with Sepia [Submarine with Environmental Performance Improvement Along-life], a name we chose with a nod and a wink to the Latin name of the common cuttlefish, famous for its excellent ability to camouflage.” Sepia analyzed a submarine's damage to human health, ecosystems and natural resources depletion, and the solutions found—while maintaining the same strategic performances as a Scorpene submarine—save 160 tons of fuel a year, or 40%, and cut the global environmental impact by 35% while eliminating liquid and solid waste disposal at sea. The team considered every step of the entire life cycle and every part of the ship, including packaging and related products such as consumables and electricity consumption on the construction site. They looked at the materials used, the manufacturing process, the period of active duty, maintenance and dismantling. “All the solutions we chose were at least at a prototype stage,” says Fusil. The silicone hull coating, for example, already exists. It not only reduces drag but is also non-toxic for the organic matter (shells, etc.) which tries to latch onto the ship. “They can latch onto this surface for a short time, but it comes off in micro-particles, taking the matter with it,” explains Fusil. The Sepia design has a shrouded propulsor and dual drive motors, a smaller one for patrol and a larger one for sprint. Li-Ion batteries would be used, helping reduce life-cycle diesel consumption by 40%.
There are ten primary missions outlined in the Department of Defense’s 2012 strategy guidance. Three of those missions require the Pentagon to maintain an effective deterrent to nuclear war that, the guidance says, “can under any circumstances confront an adversary with the prospect of unacceptable damage, both to deter potential adversaries and to assure U.S. allies and other security partners that they can count on America’s security commitments.” The CATO Institute’s Christopher Preble and Matt Fay’s recent article “To Save the Submarines, Eliminate ICBMs and Bombers” is a policy recommendation that fails to meet DOD’s high standard for an effective nuclear deterrent. While they mention the submarine’s inherent survivability, power and accuracy, they neglect other aspects required of an effective deterrent force. The deterrent force must be survivable, affordable, flexible, visible, available, credible and provide stability. While each element of the triad comprises many of these attributes, no one leg has them all. Affordability is also a key component of nuclear deterrent forces. While the $60 billion dollars quoted for the new nuclear-armed submarines seems daunting, it pales in comparison to the $400 billion for the Joint Strike Fighter, according to the Government Accountability Office. Moreover, the entire nuclear deterrence force represents only around $20 billion per year, according to Deputy Defense Secretary Ash Carter. ICBMs are the least expensive leg to maintain. Bombers still have a required conventional role, so making them non-nuclear nets only minor savings. Thus, even with the addition of new submarines, the nuclear deterrent force is incredibly affordable compared to the overall defense budget of $526 billion. The nuclear deterrent force must be credible. While the United States enjoys a technological advantage in submarine technology, there is no guarantee we will maintain it. The triad of submarines, ICBMs and bombers provides a hedge in the case of a technological breakthrough that renders any one system obsolete. It also provides insurance in the case of a systemic technological failure. A nation’s leaders must think twice about using nuclear weapons if they must strike another nation’s homeland. Submarines operating at sea do not evoke targeting concerns similar to an ICBM field in North Dakota. Submarines provide a viable second strike, but this also applies to ICBMs under any circumstance short of an all-out strike from Russia. In addition, bombers can be survivable when dispersed. Submarines are inherently flexible, but fortunately, bombers and ICBMs share this trait. Bombers can be used for conventional operations and are forward deployed. ICBMs can be re-targeted almost immediately. Submarines are not visible. They are supposed to remain undetectable until they are needed. ICBM operations are invisible as well. The actions to retarget ICBMs, or to bring them on/off alert, all happen behind the veil of a silo. Bombers are the only visible component of the triad. This makes them a vital component. No other leg can advertise American will better than the bomber. The bomber can fly a mission as a show of resolve as occurred during North Korea’s recent nuclear provocation. They can also go on alert, which can also be witnessed by adversaries. Deterrent forces also must be readily available. The ICBMs are the most available of the triad. They are always on alert at very low cost, allowing bombers to remain off alert for the majority of the time and for submarines to be swapped out or repaired when needed. Once the war in Afghanistan winds to its inevitable conclusion, phase 0 and 1 (Shape the Environment; Deter the Enemy) operations must once again rise to the fore. The triad of submarines, ICBMs and bombers has all of the qualities required of an effective deterrent force. The affordability of the nuclear triad makes arguments against any one leg shortsighted.
One of the worst things that can happen to a ship, second only to a Titanic hull breach, is a fire. The U.S. Navy is very cognizant of the dangers. In response to this threat, all U.S. Navy ships are equipped with a very sophisticated fire detection, alarm and suppression system. Why did not the USS Miami's system detect and respond (to last month's fire)? Why was so much flammable clutter on board as to provide fuel for a fire of the intensity, persistence and volume as was experienced? The distinctive odor of burning polyurethane foam was conspicuous. Poly-foam is highly flammable, it has a low ignition point and it extrudes large volumes of highly toxic smoke. It has no proper place on any ship, especially a sub. As to the dissipation of the wreckage: It should be junked. All nuclear subs should be junked. They have no credible strategic value. An accident in a nuclear sub's power reactor core could produce a nuclear explosion, with hundreds of dead (conservatively) and billions in property damage. A large part of the Seacoast would be uninhabitable for a very long time (if such an incident occurred at Portsmouth Naval Shipyard). There exists a technology that can detect, track and destroy a sub by satellite in orbit. This is a reversal of the classic tactical situation of the sub. Heretofore, the sub has been the predator, the silent and invisible hunter. A satellite could "see" the sub; the sub could not see the satellite. The sub would never see it coming. The satellite could launch three missiles with small nuclear warheads. They would not be aimed at the sub; rather, they would be targeted to a range pattern resembling the classic "navigator's cocked hat." If the sub was within t hat triangle (the triangle of death), its hull would be crushed or it would be shaken so violently that its crew would be killed and its machinery destroyed. Nuclear submarines are a dangerous and obsolete weapons system. The relation of orbital (anti-submarine warfare) systems to subs is similar to the battleship and aviation controversy. It is said that when the Ostfriesland went down, under attack by Gen. William Mitchell's bombers, some of the admirals wept.
American aerospace workers are among the most highly productive and skilled workers in the world. With a global market that is growing rapidly, we must maintain an adequate supply of workers with degrees in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) disciplines and specific manufacturing skills for U. S. industry to continue to dominate and benefit from the aerospace export market. And for aviation markets to meet the forecasted demand, we will need to recruit and train hundreds of thousands of new pilots and maintenance technicians, as a recent Boeing study has verified. We want to sell those aircraft, train those pilots, and hire those mechanics. Unfortunately, today America is simply not producing enough workers with the right technical skills. The U. S. graduates around 300,000 students a year with bachelors or associate degrees in STEM fields. The February 2012 report of the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) recommended that this be raised by one-third to meet our economic needs. One startling fact is that less than 40% of students who start college intending to earn a STEM degree actually complete the degree requirements. We need to turn that around, and AIA and our member companies are working to do just that. We are collaborating with other stakeholders to increase retention rates in engineering programs by putting in place policies and practices, such as internships and mentoring, which encourage and support the success of qualified students. And this is not just about four year degrees. Community colleges and career technical education play an equally important role in meeting our workforce needs. In fact, today one third of our current STEM employees begin their education in community colleges. For years, aerospace companies have experienced challenges in filling certain manufacturing and other technical positions. Customized credentialing programs that prepare students with the specifically required skills are playing an important role in addressing the existing STEM skills gap and constitute another key element of our industry's workforce efforts. Our STEM workforce challenge is exacerbated by the fact that the aerospace industry is graying. In 2007, we found that almost 60 percent of the U.S. aerospace workforce was age 45 or older. Today, 9.6 percent of our industry is eligible to retire, and projections are that by 2017 -- just three years from now -- 18.5% of the entire industry will be eligible to retire. At our largest corporations (those employing 100,000 or more), the percentage retirement eligible is already 18.6 percent. We are experiencing a shortage of STEM workers today, but the problem will be even greater when the bow wave of actual retirement hits us in the next couple of years.
Investment by GE Aviation in next-generation military engines will increase by 50% next year even as military budgets decline in the U.S. and around the world. The goal: to develop a sixth-generation fighter engine for the U.S. Air Force and Navy, and an advanced engine for helicopters. They will all incorporate ceramic matrix composites (CMCs) in the hot section, and 3-D printing (additive manufacturing) for difficult-to-make parts. “We haven’t had this much activity going on in next-gen military engines for a couple of decades,” says Jean Lydon-Rodgers, vice president and general manager of GE Aviation’s military systems. “Most people would be surprised to hear that, in the middle of sequestration. I couldn’t be more excited.” She won’t say specifically what these engines are for, except to bring more power for less weight and extended range though significant reductions in fuel burn. Applications could include future bombers and strike aircraft (and UAVs), the re-engining of fighters such as the F-35, and helicopters such as Black Hawks and Apaches. The engines could also be used for a turboprop for future regional airliners based on the GE38 turboshaft that powers the Sikorsky CH-53K, while versions of the GE38 could also re-engine Chinooks and V-22 Ospreys. “Our R&D is at the highest level since the F136 [GE’s alternative engine for the F-35]. It is important right now to renew the technology in our portfolio because there will be a demand for new-tech engines. We’re not going to be able to rest on our laurels or continuously upgrade our legacy fleets; we simply cannot add new technologies into today’s engines and expect them to have the capabilities the Air Force and Navy need.
U.S. manufacturing jobs in general were waning even before the recession, with employment shrinking by 22 percent between 2002 and 2012. The aerospace sector grew 7 percent over that same period. Even with the fiscal austerity in Washington, D.C., sales in the aerospace industry grew 41 percent from 2002 to 2012, driven largely by military and international sales, Holloway said. And the sector is expected to grow. Boeing projects a demand for 35,000 new planes by 2032. Airbus projects building more than 29,000 jets in the same period. States are fighting to land these jobs. Boeing, the world's largest aerospace company, sparked a bidding frenzy among states last year when a workers' union in Washington state rejected the company's contract offer and the company started looking elsewhere to make its 777X jet. Missouri, for example, held an emergency special legislative session in December 2013 and approved a $150 million a year economic incentive package to lure Boeing there. Washington kept the project after the union decided to accept the offer after all, including freezing pensions and changing to a 401(k) plan. But the significant incentives being offered reflect the importance of these jobs to states. “These are crown jewel industries. States are not wrong to value them inordinately,” said Mark Muro, a senior fellow and policy director at the Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C.
But the overall defense and aerospace industry will still grow in 2014, thanks to boosted revenue in the aerospace sector. “It is likely that 2014 will bring high single to double-digit levels of growth in the commercial aerospace sub-sector, as experienced in 2012 and expected in 2013, given the dramatic production forecasts of the aircraft manufacturers,” Deloitte says. The 2014 growth in the commercial aerospace industry is being driven by record-setting production levels, due to the accelerated replacement cycle of obsolete aircraft with newer fuel-efficient planes. The report predicts that by 2023, annual production levels in the commercial aerospace industry will increase by 25 percent. The Deloitte report also cites increases in passenger demand in places like the Middle East and the Asia-Pacific region.
Remarkably, Lowther fails to produce any examples of the USAF contributing good advice to civilian policymakers. Since its founding, history is replete with examples of the opposite; the Air Force counseled almost certainly disastrous escalation in the Korean War, the Cuban Missile Crisis, and the Vietnam War, without serious regard for the political difficulties that U.S. civilian leaders faced at the time. The USAAF, the nearly independent predecessor of the USAF, argued that the D-Day invasion was unnecessary, a policy that would almost certainly have resulted in Soviet control of Europe. In 1990, only the last-minute intervention of tactically minded generals prevented the Air Force from presenting a campaign plan that would have left Saddam Hussein’s army intact and in firm control of Kuwait. And so yes, the independent Air Force does given independent advice, but this advice tends to lean heavily towards the idea that airpower can cheaply, decisively win wars. This would be less of a problem were it not for the fact that strategic airpower is alluring, especially to civilians who lack experience with military affairs. A better approach would be to design military institutions to take an integrated view of national power, rather than invoke competitive dynamics that will likely lead to outlandish claims and bad policy recommendations. It’s About Bureaucracy The creation of the Air Force in 1947 turned airpower into a zero-sum game for the U.S. military services. Aerospace innovations developed in one service threaten the turf of the other two. This leaves the Air Force to justify itself through explicit denigration of the contribution of the other services. Indeed, Dr. Lowther manages, in this short piece, to imply that soldiers are incapable of understanding aerial maps, and that the Navy can’t contribute to antiaccess warfare. This is the inherent tension in the modern air force; shorn of its original strategic bombing justification, it struggles to conceive of itself as a support arm while simultaneously insisting that it is not a support arm. These problems exist not because air force officers and airpower theorists are bad people, but rather because we’ve established a system of military organization that makes destructive interservice conflict inevitable. The Air Force didn’t want the A-10, but felt compelled to buy it in order to undercut Army demands for intrinsic aviation. The Air Force doesn’t want drones, but letting the Army have them would threaten the future of the service. The Air Force has grown bored with its nuclear missiles, but can’t give them up because such a move would encroach upon institutional prerogatives.
In the air combat domain, anti-access and area-denial weapons technologies comprise rapidly deployable, highly mobile advanced radars and Surface to Air Missile systems, counter-stealth radars, passive geolocation sensors, and advanced digital air defence C4 networks, all of which were developed to work in concert with advanced fighter aircraft such as the Su-35S Flanker and the stealthy, “F-22-like” Sukhoi T-50 PAK-FA, unveiled last week. In the maritime combat domain, anti-access and area-denial weapons technologies comprise advanced air, sea, sub and coastal battery launched supersonic anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCM), terminally guided anti-ship ballistic missiles (ASBM), quiet submarines armed with digital torpedoes, including supercavitating designs. In the basing domain, proliferating cruise missiles and terminally guided ballistic missiles render many existing US foreign bases effectively unusable for deployment of aircraft, warships and ground forces, and the logistical elements needed to sustain these. These weapons are now seriously challenging the ability of the United States and its close allies to conduct military interventions in many parts of the world. A nation which is equipped with much less than the full gamut of anti-access and area-denial weapons will be in the position to hold key US and allied in theatre assets at serious risk. Over the coming decade, this trend will drive the United States toward disproportionate responses if a contingency demands intervention, as many elements of the existing and currently planned US force structure will simply be unusable.
Why Airpower is Perceived as Less Threatening There are many reasons why airpower, notwithstanding all its recently developed and increasingly honed capability, is viewed as significantly less aggressive and provocative than is the deployment of large-scale ground forces. Some of these reasons may carry more weight at particular times or with particular countries; others may be entirely overlooked or even occasionally invalid; and still others may be held to be true at such deeply implicit societal levels that they are scarcely acknowledged. In the aggregate, however, the following rationales present compelling support for the perceived relative innocuousness of airpower. Airpower is Perceived to be Weaker than it is Airpower is generally viewed as less capable than ground power. This is largely a carry-over from earlier wars, though several more recent battles have served to reinforce this belief further. It speaks to a demonstrable perception that airpower, though now precise and high-tech, is still less powerful overall; a tornado vice a hurricane. In recent history, the US operation in Somalia went far to justify this opinion. From an airhead just barely off the beach, the stated initial intent of getting relief supplies out into the countryside and past the warlords was only minimally achieved at best; it was only with the introduction of the ground forces to escort the supplies and guard the storehouses that the distribution efforts had any success. Not long thereafter, however, with the highly-publicized downing of two Blackhawk helicopters by fairly primitive Somali forces (and seemingly solely because of this), US forces left Somalia with their collective tail between their legs. Airpower had been given a black eye; beaten up by a force that scarcely even qualified as a bully in an operation that wasn’t even a war. The resounding perception was that the surgical, if not almost gentile, nature of airpower could not hold its own even in the streets of a third world country. This was also true in Vietnam. Despite constant bomb runs from every type of airplane in the inventory, US airpower in Vietnam proved utterly incapable of stemming the flow of supplies and troops streaming into South Vietnam from the North.
We will investigate here what can be called the ‘Ten Dilemmas of Nuclear Deterrence’. The presence of nuclear weapons between rival countries cannot guarantee the prevention of nuclear exchange or war. It is always a gamble, and it is a gamble that can always fail at some time in some place. The claim that nuclear deterrence ‘works’, at least to such an extent that you can safely rely upon it, is untenable. It is untenable because the conditions that must be established for assured safety to arise from the workings of nuclear deterrence are so restrictive that these are impossible to establish in practice and in the real world in which we live. This defect becomes clear when we understand what nuclear deterrence is – it is simply a psychological state of mind! It is a psychological state of mind that must exist in the minds of one’s nuclear opponents, i.e., among those who decide on whether or not to push the nuclear button. And it is a state of mind that you (who are relying on nuclear deterrence for your country’s security) must ensure will always exist in your opponent although you can never guarantee or ensure that it will always so hold. To put it another way: nuclear deterrence is nothing but the irrational hope that a terrible fear of the consequences of nuclear war will continuously promote wise decisions by fallible human beings operating under intense pressure in changing circumstances that neither they nor you can fully control! If to become more secure you need the threat power of nuclear weapons then you are trying to establish your security by making the other side vulnerable and more insecure because they are afraid of what your nuclear weapons can do. Similarly, the other side must try to make itself more secure by making you more vulnerable and insecure to its own nuclear arsenal. This situation is often called the security-insecurity paradox. Your own security is supposed to rest on making the other side more fearful and insecure so that it behaves the way you want it to. Then the other side seeks to overcome its insecurity to make itself more secure by promoting greater insecurity/vulnerability in its opponent. Thus we have what can also be called the ‘vulnerability paradox’. The way out of this would seem to lie in both sides accepting mutual vulnerability and a mutual ‘balance of terror’. This then should be a form of stability in the nuclear equation. Unfortunately, no such stability arises and instead we have a constant and powerful spur to continuous nuclear arms racing. To understand why this is so we first need to understand what are the basic conditions that have to be met if there is to be nuclear security even by the logic of nuclear deterrence thinking. According to this ‘logic’ a country must have, what is called, ‘an assured second-strike capacity’. Between two countries having nuclear weapons there is always the possibility (and the temptation) that the country that uses its nuclear weapons in a properly targeted fashion first can hope or expect to finish off all or most of the opponent’s nuclear capacity to retaliate after such a first-strike. Therefore, a country must be able to ‘absorb’ a first-strike and have enough left over to devastate the opponent so that the opponent is not tempted to strike first. Developing more nuclear weapons in this way may seem to the side doing it a reasonable thing to do in order to protect itself. But to the other side this means your opponent is making itself stronger in the name of developing second-strike capacities but can also make an even more massive first-strike (regardless of whether or not it declares a policy of No First Use), and therefore must be a spur to the threatened side also developing more nuclear weapons in the name of strengthening and ensuring the survival of its own second-strike capacity. A third dilemma can be called the ‘predictability issue’. Since deterrence is a state of mind in your opponent you are always tempted to try ways of making that opponent’s behaviour more predictable, i.e., in accordance with what you want. Rather than simply hope that fear of your nuclear arsenal will make the opponent behave the way you want it to, you try and replace hope with some form of compulsion. To demand a high degree of predictability about an opponent’s behaviour means a demand for repeated, regular, institutionalised predictability and symmetry by each nuclear player vis-à-vis the other. The reality is that this is not possible. But as long as one nuclear player or the other seeks to establish what it thinks can be the conditions in which such assured and predictable behaviour by the other side will be forthcoming, then this slides easily into a strategy of not just simple deterrence but aggressive compellence. This strategy of compellence involves certain kinds of nuclear preparations and their associated political implications and signals whereby the other side is supposedly ‘compelled’ to follow the pattern set by, and more ‘controlled’ by the first nuclear player. Not only is nuclear arms escalation written into this ‘compellence’ script but nuclear tensions are even more heightened than otherwise. The ‘certainties’ of compellence are substituted for the ‘uncertain certainties’ of ‘normal’ deterrence. Something like this happened with the US pursuing such a compellence strategy as part of its efforts to ‘stabilise’ and ‘control’ to its own ‘advantage’ the nuclear arms race of the late seventies and eighties. It is also a script written into the BMD, which represents the US ambition nuclearly/militarily to dominate the world via domination of space itself. Compellence is a more aggressive form of seeking ‘political advantage’ through nuclear weapons and there is no natural firebreak between the dangerous instability of deterrence-based nuclear behaviour and the more dangerous instability of compellence-based nuclear behaviour. It is not enough just to have nuclear weapons or to claim that they are never going to be used and that their purpose is only to prevent a nuclear conflict. Your nuclear threat must be credible. Indeed, an opponent will not be deterred if it believes that the deterrer will never use his nuclear weapons. Thus the ‘capability’ and the ‘will’ of the deterring country must not be doubted. The ‘enemy’ should be convinced that its nuclear opponent will use nuclear weapons if pushed to the brink, or at least uncertain whether or not they will be used, but never certain or confident that they will not be used. However, any second-use of nuclear weapons is not, and cannot be, an act of security retrieval or enhancement. Once an opponent has launched a first-strike against you then your security has gone. By using your nuclear weapons second, all you are doing is engaging in an act of revenge – to make the other country suffer too. This is also a senseless act of revenge because it only sets off a chain of further launches and counter-launches, which further devastates both countries. This being so, the side using nuclear weapons first can entertain ideas that a second-strike is not credible. Thus the question of ‘credibility’ or willingness to use nuclear weapons becomes very important. So governments that have nuclear weapons despite occasional pronouncements that these will never be used do not actually want the public or other governments to seriously believe them. This would undermine that country’s credibility. In the face of all kinds of challenges and uncertainties – technological, military, etc. – the capability to use nuclear weapons must be constantly updated and fine-tuned and available for showing in a variety of circumstances. Also, the political will to use nuclear weapons (presumably in the last resort) must be periodically displayed. Thus the requirements of making one’s nuclear deterrent credible creates powerful pressure for the generation and sustenance of both an enduring politics of nuclear-related hostility – including nuclear brandishing and brinkmanship – and of arms racing between rivals. Nuclear perspectives/behaviour are the prisoner of, and subordinated to, the more fundamental and overarching framework and context of political hostility between nuclear-political rivals. Nuclearisation/militarisation are themselves the symptoms or results or expressions of this prior hostility. They are not their primary causes and therefore cannot be the solutions undoing this hostility. Indeed, they exacerbate such tensions/hostility because nuclearisation is itself the announcement that one is willing to inflict the utmost devastation to the opponent country and society. It was not the supposed deterrent qualities of the US-Soviet nuclear stand-off that eroded political hostilities but the other way around. It was the Gorbachev initiated unraveling of Cold War politics that paved the way for the erosion of nuclear tensions. The same principle of the prior importance of politics applies to the India-Pakistan situation. And nuclear weapons, including the presumed powers of nuclear deterrence, operate within this wider and more determining political context. The rhythms of deterrence behaviour are subordinated to the more powerful rhythms of political behaviour between mutually hostile countries. This gives rise to a classic paradox in the search for stable deterrence: the conditions that are thought to make it necessary to apply deterrence guarantee that it will not be stable. The extent to which deterrence is genuinely stable is the extent to which it is unnecessary! India-Pakistan cannot have a stable deterrence equation nor did the US and the Soviet Union. But Britain and France can have a stable deterrent equation with each other precisely because it is unnecessary for them to have such a nuclear equation.
In its most basic theoretical form, deterrence is an equation involving two parties, where one party weighs the gain it may make by pursuing a course of action against the price it may pay by the retaliation of the other party. By way of illustration, it is useful to consider two nations, Nation A and Nation B, whose interests collide on a particular issue. If Nation A is known to be considering a course of action contrary to the interests of Nation B, Nation B may signal its intent to retaliate if Nation A does indeed choose that course of action. This leaves Nation A with a decision. First, it must decide whether Nation B has the capability to carry out its threat, and, second, it must decide whether Nation B has the will to carry out its threat. And the deciding factor in both of these judgments is the credibility of Nation B's capability and will to carry out the threat. If, as a result of this cost-benefit calculation, Nation A decides not to go ahead with the course of action, then deterrence has been successful; but if Nation A decides that the gains out-weigh the risk or price, and goes ahead regardless of the threat, then deterrence has failed. This example, though, provides only the barest outline sketch of how deterrence operates in the foreign policy arena. The simplicity of the theoretical formula belies the complexity of international diplomacy in practice and critics of deterrence have focused on the relative rigidity of the formula compared to the fluidity and unpredictability of international diplomacy. Furthermore, deterrence rests heavily on certain assumptions about the parties involved and the way they will react. First, deterrence rests heavily on the belief that rationality will prevail throughout the process. Not only do the various parties have to behave in fundamentally rational ways, but each party must perceive the other as behaving in a fundamentally rational way. In practice, this leads to a complicated process of perception and counterperception as policymakers and intelligence bodies from each nation estimate and try to influence what the other is thinking. Critics of deterrence rightly point out that the decisions of political leaders often do not fall into neatly explainable categories and that however carefully the deterrence situation may be controlled, ultimately the decision is a subjective one. In foreign affairs as in everyday life, behavior in deterrence situations is based on instinct as well as reason and this instinctive element can never be confidently discounted. Moreover, the way both parties view the situation can be influenced qualitatively by any number of factors, including irrationality, misperception, poor judgment, or even just wishful thinking. In short, what may seem an unacceptable price to one person or under some circumstances could well be judged by another under different circumstances to be acceptable. Moreover, since history is filled with events that were quite simply unpredictable, it is clearly difficult to account with any certainty for the myriad of accidents, mistakes, and emotions that may play a part in a decision. At best, employing deterrence is an approximation, but in the thermonuclear age, with weapons capable of global annihilation, the stakes are higher than ever before. Because deterrence is very much in the eye of the beholder, and actual intentions and capabilities are less important than the other side's estimate of those intentions and capabilities, the process of communicating and interpreting information is crucial. Known as signaling, this two-way discourse is open to a wide range of possible scenarios. One involves explicit communications, including public speeches and classified diplomatic correspondence. Another is implicit measures such as partial mobilization or the placing of forces on alert or more subtle measures designed to be detected by foreign intelligence bodies. Ideally, each method is designed to exploit the complex interplay of perceptions and counterperceptions. Sometimes deterrence fails. Often in the history of international affairs the cost-benefit calculation has led to an unexpected result. In 1904 Russia ignored Japanese warnings that its policies would lead to retaliation, resulting ultimately in the Russo-Japanese War. In 1914 the Central Powers recognized that their policies risked drawing the Entente into war in Europe, but continued regardless. During World War II, Nazi Germany persisted with U-boat attacks on American transatlantic merchant shipping despite President Franklin D. Roosevelt's explicit warnings that it would likely provoke U.S. retaliation. In December 1941, despite U.S. military strength, Japan calculated that its interests were best served by a surprise attack on the U.S. fleet at Pearl Harbor. In mid-1962 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev installed nuclear missiles in Cuba despite President John F. Kennedy's explicit warnings that doing so would provoke U.S. retaliation. And in 1991 the Middle East erupted in violence as Saddam Hussein ignored the threat of U.S. intervention should Iraq invade Kuwait.
Constant technology advances in the development of nuclear warheads and in the designing of the range and accuracy of delivery systems is also a major input in ensuring the degenerative logic of deterrence-based thinking and behaviour. The more inaccurate and relatively invulnerable or undetectable the nuclear missiles are the more ‘stabilising’ they are. That is to say, if the missiles are not very accurate then they can be used to attack cities but not specific military targets. This makes them les useful as first-strike weapons aiming to, or capable of, knocking out an opponent’s military installations (including its nuclear missile installations and air bases) and more useful as second-strike weapons able to devastate cities. In the jargon this is called the difference between counter-value targets (e.g. cities) and counter-force ones (e.g. military/nuclear infrastructure). Moreover, the best second-strike nuclear weapons are considered to be those that combine low accuracy with relative invulnerability to a first strike. Thus submarine-based nuclear-tipped missiles are seen as the best guarantor of second-strike capacity. What happens, however, when land missile systems become more mobile (always being moved around on rail or road systems rather than being stationed in fixed silos), when there is 24 hour rotation of airplanes carrying nuclear weapons, and when submarine launched missiles become ever more accurate (which is happening), and when efforts at detection of submarines and anti-submarine warfare make steady technical advances? What all this means is that technology advances are themselves undermining the distinction between ‘stabilising’ second-strike weapons and ‘de-stabilising’ first-strike weapons since the former can increasingly double up to do the job of the latter. In short, this undermines hopes of stabilizing the nuclear equation. What is more, new technological breakthroughs, like a developed Star Wars project of the kind envisaged by the US, are profoundly destabilizing. One would need a separate essay to explain this complexity fully. In short, because technology does not stand still neither does nuclear arms development. This is not just a matter of replacing the old with the new but also of creating new problems, difficulties and dangers.
The fear of a first-strike leads to the search for what are called ‘survivability enhancing practices’. These are measures aiming to ensure that one’s second-strike capacity even after a first-strike is relatively unimpaired. But these very practices themselves undermine the stability of the deterrence equation. The two most important such measures are a) to disperse one’s nuclear arsenal as widely as possible; and b) to adopt what is in effect a ‘launch-on-warning’ posture for one’s missiles. Both give rise to grave problems. The first involves a centralization-decentralization dilemma. It is not enough to disperse the locations of nuclear delivery systems. There is also the problem of decentralizing command and control over such systems. This is because there is always the danger of what is called a ‘decapitating first-strike’. That is to say, an opponent can not only strike first, but seek to decapitate the command and control system of the opponent, i.e., finish off the key decision-makers who are the apex of the chain of command over the nuclear arsenal. Even the establishing of ‘redundant’ or multiple chains of command to become operative in wartime may not prove adequate to the impact of an effective decapitating first-strike. To avoid this dilemma one has to greatly decentralize command and control to junior levels and more localized personnel at the much lower rungs of the chain of command so they can carry out a second-strike. But any such decentralization greatly enhances the possibility of an accidental launch or a miscalculation (especially in wartime situations) that leads to a launch on the presumption that an enemy nuclear attack is taking place or about to take place. We now know from recently disclosed official documents how close a Russian submarine was to launching a nuclear attack on a US ship during the Cuban Missile crisis on the basis of just such de-centralised authority because it thought that ship was torpedoing its submarine. [This event is now to be enshrined in a Hollywood movie.]. Pakistan, as a much smaller country fearful of a possible decapitating first-strike by India, will have to face a particularly acute dilemma of centralization-decentralization. But the problem is acute enough for India as well. As for adopting a ‘launch-on warning’ posture to ensure second-strike capacity, this was the dominant form taken by the stationing of land-based missiles of both the USSR and the US during most of the Cold War period. What this means, of course, is that there is an inescapable trade-off between the requirements of nuclear safety and guarding against the risks of a launch by accident or miscalculation, and the requirements of deterrence efficacy. During the Cold War period (even afterwards) there were various occasions when there were false alarms and in some of those cases, matters came close to a head with the near launch by one side of its missiles. [The best study of this is ‘The Logic of Accidental Nuclear War’ by Bruce Blair, Brookings Institute, 1993.]. But another rarely noticed point is that launch-on-warning raised a fundamental question about nuclear deterrence. This question is not about whether or not deterrence actually worked but whether it even existed! A launch-on-warning posture meant that the US had less than 25 minutes before a Soviet missile could hit it and therefore a maximum of only that much time to decide whether the alarm was a false one or not. Since the US had submarines much more closely positioned to the Soviet mainland, the latter had only around 10 minutes before there would be a hit, so that much less time to decide on its response. In the US case from the time the alarm is raised about a possible Soviet launch, 10-12 minutes would have to elapse for the missile to be identified, its path tracked and the necessary information relayed to top command. Another 2-3 minutes would elapse before this could be communicated to the President. Any decision (whether this was a false alarm or a real one needing the order to fire off) taken by the President if it was to be communicated to all necessary stations so as to be carried out would require another 8-10 minutes. In short, out of the roughly 25 minutes in which a decision by the President has to be made — even if the President was in direct telephonic communication with key aides — he has literally only one or two minutes in which to take a truly momentous decision. When the space and time allowed for human decision is so shortened by adopting the posture of launch-on-warning, what then is one to make of the claim that deterrence is in operation when there can never be any foolproof check on an accidental launch by an opponent or false alarm by one’s own system? In the case of India, the best survivability practice would be for both sides to move towards a launch-on-warning posture, which is something they may well do in the future. But the missile flight time between the two countries at 5-8 minutes is so much shorter than even in the Cold War case for the US. There is no way there can be even the illusion of being able to maintain a proper check on preventing launches by accident or miscalculation. The trade-off between wanting greater nuclear safety and deterrence efficacy in South Asia is an even starker one than was the case between the great Cold War rivals. According to the logic of nuclear deterrence thinking, it is not enough to have a second-strike capacity that survives a possible first-strike. This capacity must be able to inflict what is called “unacceptable damage” on the opponent. If after a first-strike you only have a few weapons left over then your opponent may be prepared to take the risk of a first-strike and ‘absorb’ the second-strike. But what is “unacceptable damage”? And how do you ensure that you have it after a devastating first-strike? The simple answer is that the concept is inescapably vague and impossible to quantify and there is no assurance that you can retain the ability to inflict such “unacceptable damage” after an enemy first-strike on you or that the damage you might be able to inflict would be unacceptable to the opponent. All that happens is that both sides have to embark on the escalator of making more and better nuclear weapons in the futile search for achieving such a second-strike capacity. George Lee Butler, who for 12 years headed the US’s Strategic Air Command (which is the service that has overall control of the US nuclear arsenal) and who between 1992-5 was the key Presidential adviser (the one person the President must consult before pressing the nuclear button) and subsequently turned nuclear disarmer, said quite correctly in regard to the “unacceptable damage” issue that this was impossible to quantify and impossible to operationalize. The US ended up targeting over 16,000 locations in the USSR with its ready delivery systems but could still never be sure that they could have an ‘adequate’ second-strike capacity to cause “unacceptable damage”. Butler revealed that he was himself so shaken, when he took over supreme command, by the revelations of the insane logic that was operating in US nuclear preparations in the name of deterrence efficacy that he began to systematically question the basic assumptions of such thinking and the security paradigm based on such thinking.
Using nuclear power in place of fossil-fuel energy sources, such as coal, has prevented some 1.8 million air pollution-related deaths globally and could save millions of more lives in coming decades, concludes a study. The researchers also find that nuclear energy prevents emissions of huge quantities of greenhouse gases. These estimates help make the case that policymakers should continue to rely on and expand nuclear power in place of fossil fuels to mitigate climate change, the authors say (Environ. Sci. Technol., DOI: 10.1021/es3051197).¶ In the wake of the 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster in Japan, critics of nuclear power have questioned how heavily the world should rely on the energy source, due to possible risks it poses to the environment and human health.¶ “I was very disturbed by all the negative and in many cases unfounded hysteria regarding nuclear power after the Fukushima accident,” says report coauthor Pushker A. Kharecha, a climate scientist at NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, in New York.¶ Working with Goddard’s James E. Hansen, Kharecha set out to explore the benefits of nuclear power. The pair specifically wanted to look at nuclear power’s advantages over fossil fuels in terms of reducing air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions.¶ Kharecha was surprised to find no broad studies on preventable deaths that could be attributed to nuclear power’s pollution savings. But he did find data from a 2007 study on the average number of deaths per unit of energy generated with fossil fuels and nuclear power (Lancet, DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61253-7). These estimates include deaths related to all aspects of each energy source from mining the necessary natural resources to power generation. For example, the data took into account chronic bronchitis among coal miners and air pollution-related conditions among the public, including lung cancer.¶ The NASA researchers combined this information with historical energy generation data to estimate how many deaths would have been caused if fossil-fuel burning was used instead of nuclear power generation from 1971 to 2009. They similarly estimated that the use of nuclear power over that time caused 5,000 or so deaths, such as cancer deaths from radiation fallout and worker accidents. Comparing those two estimates, Kharecha and Hansen came up with the 1.8 million figure.¶ They next estimated the total number of deaths that could be prevented through nuclear power over the next four decades using available estimates of future nuclear use. Replacing all forecasted nuclear power use until 2050 with natural gas would cause an additional 420,000 deaths, whereas swapping it with coal, which produces significantly more pollution than gas, would mean about 7 million additional deaths. The study focused strictly on deaths, not long-term health issues that might shorten lives, and the authors did not attempt to estimate potential deaths tied to climate change.¶ Finally the pair compared carbon emissions from nuclear power to fossil fuel sources. They calculated that if coal or natural gas power had replaced nuclear energy from 1971 to 2009, the equivalent of an additional 64 gigatons of carbon would have reached the atmosphere. Looking forward, switching out nuclear for coal or natural gas power would lead to the release of 80 to 240 gigatons of additional carbon by 2050.¶ By comparison, previous climate studies suggest that the total allowable emissions between now and 2050 are about 500 gigatons of carbon. This level of emissions would keep atmospheric CO2 concentrations around 350 ppm, which would avoid detrimental warming.¶ Because large-scale implementation of renewable energy options, such as wind or solar, faces significant challenges, the researchers say their results strongly support the case for nuclear as a critical energy source to help stabilize or reduce greenhouse gas concentrations.¶ Bas van Ruijven, an environmental economist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, in Boulder, Colo., says the estimates on prevented deaths seem reasonable. But he wonders if the conclusion that nuclear power saves hundreds of times more lives than it claims will convince ardent critics.¶ The nuclear power issue is “so polarized that people who oppose nuclear power will immediately dispute the numbers,” Van Ruijven says. Nonetheless, he agrees with the pair’s conclusions on the importance of nuclear power.
This is what has happened in the public mind concerning nuclear power over the last half century. Concepts concerning nuclear reactions and nuclear radiation are in themselves complicated and mysterious.¶ Over the last couple of decades physics advances in fields such as quantum mechanics, which is linked to nuclear processes has compounded matters for the public. The image of strong and mysterious forces and effects is now well entrenched. There are Hollywood movies and TV programmes about space travellers or alien invaders who use time travel and quantum forces, and then battle to evade the dangerous intergalactic nuclear zones.¶ A consequence of all this is that internationally the public is now really ‘spooked’ when it comes to the topic of nuclear power. A real ‘fear factor’ looms over the mere word ‘nuclear.’ Newspapers love this, and really push imagery like; ‘nuclear leak’ or ‘radiation exposure.’¶ To a nuclear physicist like me, I look upon such public reaction half with amusement and half with dismay. The amusement comes from the fact that so many people can be scared so easily by so little. It is like shouting: “Ghost in the bedroom,” and everyone runs and hides in the hills.¶ The dismay reaction is that there is a body of anti-nuclear activists who do not want the public to know the truth, and the anti-nukes enjoy stoking the fear factor and maintaining public ignorance.¶ Let us now ponder the Fukushima nuclear incident which has been in the news again lately.¶ Firstly let us get something clear. There was no Fukushima nuclear disaster. Total number of people killed by nuclear radiation at Fukushima was zero. Total injured by radiation was zero. Total private property damaged by radiation….zero. There was no nuclear disaster. What there was, was a major media feeding frenzy fuelled by the rather remote possibility that there may have been a major radiation leak.¶ At the time, there was media frenzy that “reactors at Fukushima may suffer a core meltdown.” Dire warnings were issued. Well the reactors did suffer a core meltdown. What happened? Nothing.
Recently some water leaked out of the Fukushima plant. It contained a very small amount of radioactive dust. The news media quoted the radiation activity in the physics measure of miliSieverts. The public don’t know what a Sievert or a milliSievert is. As it happens a milliSievert is a very small measure.¶ Doubling a very small amount is still inconsequential. It is like saying: “Yesterday there was a matchstick on the football field; today there are two matchsticks on the football field. Matchstick pollution has increased by a massive 100% in only 24 hours.”¶ The statement is mathematically correct but silly and misleading.¶ At Fukushima a couple of weeks ago, some mildly radioactive water leaked into the sea. The volume of water was about equal to a dozen home swimming pools. In the ocean this really is a ‘drop in the ocean.’¶ The radiation content was so little that people could swim in the ocean without the slightest cause for concern. Any ocean naturally contains some radioactivity all of the time anyway. There is natural radiation around us all of the time and has always been there since the birth of the earth.¶ Understandably the general public do not understand nuclear radiation so the strangest comments occur. On an internet blog some person stated that people on the north coast of Australia must be warned about the radiation in the sea coming from Fukushima. Good grief!¶ Meantime the Fukushima site now looks like an oil refinery. A lot of storage tanks have been built there to hold water that has been flushed through the damaged reactors to aid in cooling. Quite frankly, scientifically speaking, the best thing to do with the mildly radioactive waste water would be to intentionally pour it into the sea. The water which is currently in the new Fukushima storage tanks has already been filtered to remove radioactive Caesium.¶ All that is left is a bit of radioactive Tritium. Tritium is actually part of the water molecule anyway…so what we really have is…well, water in water. The Tritium atom is a hydrogen atom, Hydrogen Tritium which has two neutrons in its nucleus which is a normal but rare variation in the hydrogen atom. Most hydrogen atoms have only a single proton in the nucleus and no neutrons. A rare hydrogen variation is called Deuterium and such atoms have one proton plus one neutron. Even rarer than Deuterium is the Tritium form of hydrogen which has one proton plus two neutrons. These variants are known as isotopes. Water is H2O and water molecules in which the Tritium isotope of the hydrogen atom is found are molecules referred to as ‘Heavy Water.’ It really is just water, so you can’t filter it out of the normal ‘light water.’¶ The Tritium heavy water is very mildly radioactive and is found normally in the sea all over the world all of the time. This Tritium concentration in the one thousand storage tanks at Fukushima is higher than that found naturally in the sea, but is still so low as to pose no real danger at all.¶ No doubt the Japanese government is too scared to release this water into the sea because of the howl of criticism which would no doubt follow.¶ A further complication is that in the last couple of weeks the press has reported further spillage of water. These reports are such that it looks like a continuous failure of the Fukushima engineers to contain the situation.¶ The latest spillage was about 400 litres of water, which is about as much liquid as would fill four motor car fuel tanks. Reportedly, one of the one thousand storage tanks was not totally horizontal when it was built so when it was filled to the top some water overflowed on one side.¶ As soon as the spillage occurred they fixed the problem. But the rules require the incident to be reported, even though the spillage was not of any biological consequence to anyone, or to any fauna or flora.
The Fukushima incident will continue to attract media attention for some time to come, I imagine. It has become such a good story to roll with that it will not just go away. However, in sober reflection and retrospection one has to come to the conclusion that far from being a nuclear disaster the Fukushima incident was actually a wonderful illustration of the safety of nuclear power.¶ The largest earthquake and consequent tsunami on record struck an ageing nuclear power plant which was built to a now obsolete boiling water reactor technology, and no nuclear damage resulted to people and property in the neighbourhood.¶ Poor management systems compounded matters and were implicated in the failure of the cooling circuit. The reactor cores suffered a meltdown. Due to the magnitude of the tsunami disaster there were no emergency services able to help, they were deployed elsewhere or paralysed because there were no roads or infrastructure available.¶ Hydrogen gas leaked out of a reactor, collected under the building’s roof and then exploded, blowing the roof off in front of the world’s TV cameras. Fukushima had devices called ‘recombiners’ designed to prevent the hydrogen build-up but they were not working because they needed an external electricity supply.¶ Financially speaking and operationally speaking the reactors were wrecked, but nobody was killed or injured by any nuclear radiation.¶ Fukushima showed that a nuclear power plant can take the maximum punch of nature’s brutality, and yet the surrounding population does not fry and die as so often dramatically predicted by the fear factor enthusiasts.
As is often the case, the passage of time yields clarity about events, and the nuclear power plant accident at Fukushima is no different. It has become clear that the misinformation and hysterics by anti-nuclear groups and individuals were mostly wrong. Their doomsday prophesizing actually worsened human suffering and environmental impacts by contributing to unwise decisions by political leaders in Japan and elsewhere to shut down nuclear plants. In contrast, bloggers and experts from within the nuclear community accurately predicted outcomes and human health impacts. As was predicted on this blog and elsewhere, the multi-barrier reactor containment design protected the public. Contrary to claims by anti-nuclear groups, the melted cores did NOT burn through the reactor vessels. The containment structures remained virtually intact. The damaged reactor fuel remained inside the reactor vessels and containment systems. Despite preposterous claims by Greenpeace and others, there were no chunks of plutonium scattered across the countryside. Only radioactive gasses escaped over the land, and most of that gas was short lived Iodine that has long since decayed away. As reported on Bloomberg and other news sources, no one in the public was harmed by radiation from the damaged reactors. A small number of plant workers received higher than normal radiation exposures, without lasting effects. Any hypothetical future health effects will be immeasurably low and will be indistinguishable from normal disease rates within the general population. No one, not even the “Fukushima 50″, was exposed to life threatening amounts of radiation. Journalists who flew across the Pacific to cover the story received more radiation exposure from cosmic rays in flight than they received from the reactors once on the ground. The visually spectacular hydrogen explosions of the plant buildings, while providing great fodder for anti-nuclear rhetoric had little impact on the safety of the reactors, and harmed no one. The unit 4 fuel storage pools did not empty of water and did not catch on fire. The fuel there remained safely submerged and suffered no damage of any consequence. Finally, there was no need for the 50-mile evacuation zone ordered by NRC Chairman Greg Jaczko. His decision still has nuclear experts scratching their heads and wondering why. Jaczko’s actions demonstrated he lacks the experience and knowledge to ask the right questions at crucial moments. In addition, he lacked the wisdom to recognize other more credible information was available that contradicted his view. He needlessly rushed forward with an ill-advised decision that was horribly wrong. This is not to imply there were no environmental or economic impacts from the reactor accident – of course there were! The expensive cleanup in surrounding areas will take years and will cost billions. This is but a small fraction of the total cost of recovery from the horrific earthquake and tsunami. The earthquake and tsunami were responsible for untold human suffering and devastation. That is where the focus of the world should have been and should continue to be. The problems at the Fukushima nuclear plant accident have contributed needlessly to Japan’s economic burden by prompting the irrational shutdown of nuclear plants across the country. This has caused energy shortages and billions of dollars of additional costs from skyrocketing imports of fossil fuels. Of course, the fossil fuels providers are scrambling to rake in tens of billions of dollars in profits. The health effects to Japan’s population were NOT from radiation, but from stress caused by the unfounded fear of future health effects. The responsibility for this lies squarely on anti-nuclear activists who relished in spouting fatalistic, exaggerated claims, and on an uninformed media who presented those claims as virtual facts while downplaying opposing views from true experts in the field.
The Fukushima Daiichi meltdown was the most extensive nuclear disaster since Chernobyl. Radiation release critically contaminated a "dead zone" of several hundred square kilometers around the plant, and low levels of radioactive material were found as far as North America and Europe.¶ But most of the radioactivity was dumped in the Pacific -- only 19 percent of the released material was deposited over land -- keeping the exposed population relatively small.¶ "There are groups of people who have said there would be no effects," said Jacobson.¶ A month after the disaster, the head of the United Nations Science Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, for example, predicted that there would be no serious public health consequences resulting from the radiation.¶ Global reach?¶ Evaluating the claim, Ten Hoeve and Jacobson used a 3-D global atmospheric model, developed over 20 years of research, to predict the transport of radioactive material. A standard health-effects model was used to estimate human exposure to radioactivity.¶ Because of inherent uncertainties in the emissions and the health-effects model, the researchers found a range of possible death tolls, with a best estimate of 130. A wide span of cancer morbidities was also predicted, with a best estimate of 180.¶ Those affected according to the model were overwhelmingly in Japan, with extremely small effects noticeable in mainland Asia and North America. The United States was predicted to suffer between 0 and 12 deaths and 0 and 30 cancer morbidities, although the methods used were less precise for areas that saw only low radionuclide concentrations.¶ "These worldwide values are relatively low," said Ten Hoeve. He explained they should "serve to manage the fear in other countries that the disaster had an extensive global reach."
Another perennial concern is that the water contaminated with radioactive particles still leaking from the stricken nuclear power plant site is poisoning Pacific Ocean fish and other seafood. There is no doubt that ingesting radionuclides is one of the worst forms of radiation exposure, because it continues for a long period of time. But, with the exception of bottom-feeding fish and sessile (immobile) filter feeders caught in the immediate vicinity, any radionuclides from Fukushima have been diluted by the vastness of the Pacific to insignificant quantities. The extra radionuclides from Fukushima are simply not enough to create a dose large enough to cause any human health effects outside the immediate vicinity of the stricken nuclear power plant.¶ Nor is the radioactive contamination from Fukushima the cause of changes to Pacific sea-bottom life observed in recent years off the U.S. west coast, as the marine scientists at Deep Sea News recently noted. Those shifts most likely stem from the copious quantities of carbon dioxide spewed by fossil fuel–fired power plants that are changing the climate and, thus, the tiny plants known as phytoplankton that serve as the base of the oceanic food chain.¶ When it comes to radiation, the nuclear weapons testing conducted from the 1940s to the 1980s contributed orders of magnitude more radioactivity to the oceans than Fukushima (even when combined with Chernobyl, a much larger nuclear catastrophe). There is also an estimated 37 x 10^18 becquerels worth of radioactivity in the oceans from naturally dissolved uranium in seawater anyway, which some view as a future nuclear fuel source but is not generally considered a health risk. (A becquerel measures the rate of radiation emission.) And there are other naturally occurring radioactive elements in seawater as well, such as polonium.¶ That means the tuna caught in the Pacific have always been naturally radioactive (and pose less risk than dental x-rays, as the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution notes). Or as marine scientist Ken Buesseler of Woods Hole put it in a scientific paper on the subject published in 2012, "though [cesium] isotopes are elevated 10 to 1,000 [times] over prior levels in waters off Japan, radiation risks due to these radionuclides are below those generally considered harmful to marine animals and human consumers, and even below those from naturally occurring radionuclides."¶ Marine scientists have calculated that, based on all the radioactive particles released (or leaking) from Fukushima, a dose due to this most recent nuclear accident would add up to a total of roughly one microsievert (a unit of radiation exposure) of extra radiation—roughly one tenth the average daily dose most Americans experience, one fortieth the amount from a cross–North America flight and one one-hundredth the exposure from a dental x-ray. This also means that no one in the U.S. should be taking potassium iodide pills, especially because there has been no radioactive iodine issuing from Fukushima for several years now. (Radioactive iodine has a half-life of just eight days, meaning that all of it was gone within three months of the March 2011 nuclear accident in Japan.)¶ Likewise, the debris from Fukushima that has begun to arrive on U.S. shores is also relatively benign. In fact, any radiation from the flotsam is likely to have far less an impact than the novel species it may carry with it across the Pacific, which could potentially spark a biological invasion.
Even if initial nuclear use did not quickly end the fighting, the supposition of inexorable momentum in a developing exchange, with each side rushing to overreaction amid confusion and uncertainty, is implausible. It fails to consider what the situation of the decisionmakers would really be. Neither side could want escalation. Both would be appalled at what was going on. Both would be desperately looking for signs that the other was ready to call a halt. Both, given the capacity for evasion or concealment which modem delivery platforms and vehicles can possess, could have in reserve significant forces invulnerable enough not to entail use-or-lose pressures. (It may be more open to question, as noted earlier, whether newer nuclearweapon possessors can be immediately in that position; but it is within reach of any substantial state with advanced technological capabilities, and attaining it is certain to be a high priority in the development of forces.) As a result, neither side can have any predisposition to suppose, in an ambiguous situation of fearful risk, that the right course when in doubt is to go on copiously launching weapons. And none of this analysis rests on any presumption of highly subtle or pre-concerted rationality. The rationality required is plain. The argument is reinforced if we consider the possible reasoning of an aggressor at a more dispassionate level. Any substantial nuclear armoury can inflict destruction outweighing any possible prize that aggression could hope to seize. A state attacking the possessor of such an armoury must therefore be doing so (once given that it cannot count upon destroying the armoury pre-emptively) on a judgement that the possessor would be found lacking in the will to use it. If the attacked possessor used nuclear weapons, whether first or in response to the aggressor's own first use, this judgement would begin to look dangerously precarious. There must be at least a substantial possibility of the aggressor leaders' concluding that their initial judgement had been mistaken—that the risks were after all greater than whatever prize they had been seeking, and that for their own country's , survival they must call off the aggression. Deterrence planning such as that of NATO was directed in the first place to preventing the initial misjudgement and in the second, if it were nevertheless made, to compelling such a reappraisal. The former aim had to have primacy, because it could not be taken for granted that the latter was certain to work. But there was no ground for assuming in advance, for all possible scenarios, that the chance of its working must be negligible. An aggressor state would itself be at huge risk if nuclear war developed, as its leaders would know. It may be argued that a policy which abandons hope of physically defeating the enemy and simply hopes to get him to desist is pure gamble, a matter of who blinks first; and that the political and moral nature of most likely aggressors, almost ex hypothesi, makes them the less likely to blink. One response to this is to ask what is the alternative—it can only be surrender. But a more positive and hopeful answer lies in the fact that the criticism is posed in a political vacuum. Real-life conflict would have a political context. The context which concerned NATO during the cold war, for example, was one of defending vital interests against a postlated aggressor whose own vital interests would not be engaged, or would be less engaged. Certainty is not possible, but a clear asymmetry of vital interest is a legitimate basis for expecting an asymmetry, credible to both sides, of resolve in conflict. That places upon statesmen, as page 23 has noted, the key task in deterrence of building up in advance a clear and shared grasp of where limits lie. That was plainly achieved in cold-war Europe. If vital interests have been defined in a way that is dear, and also clearly not overlapping or incompatible with those of the adversary, a credible basis has been laid for the likelihood of greater resolve in resistance. It was also sometimes suggested by critics that whatever might be indicated by theoretical discussion of political will and interests, the military environment of nuclear warfare—particularly difficulties of communication and control—would drive escalation with overwhelming probability to the limit. But it is obscure why matters should be regarded as inevitably .so for every possible level and setting of action. Even if the history of war suggested (as it scarcely does) that military decision-makers are mostly apt to work on the principle 'When in doubt, lash out', the nuclear revolution creates an utterly new situation. The pervasive reality, always plain to both sides during the cold war, is `If this goes on to the end, we are all ruined'. Given that inexorable escalation would mean catastrophe for both, it would be perverse to suppose them permanently incapable of framing arrangements which avoid it. As page 16 has noted, NATO gave its military commanders no widespread delegated authority, in peace or war, to launch nuclear weapons without specific political direction. Many types of weapon moreover had physical safeguards such as PALs incorporated to reinforce organizational ones. There were multiple communication and control systems for passing information, orders, and prohibitions. Such systems could not be totally guaranteed against disruption if at a fairly intense level of strategic exchange—which was only one of many possible levels of conflict— an adversary judged it to be in his interest to weaken political control. It was far from clear why he necessarily should so judge. Even then, however, it remained possible to operate on a general fail-safe presumption: no authorization, no use. That was the basis on which NATO operated. If it is feared that the arrangements which 1 a nuclear-weapon possessor has in place do not meet such standards in some respects, the logical course is to continue to improve them rather than to assume escalation to be certain and uncontrollable, with all the enormous inferences that would have to flow from such an assumption. The likelihood of escalation can never be 100 per cent, and never zero. Where between those two extremes it may lie can never be precisely calculable in advance; and even were it so calculable, it would not be uniquely fixed—it would stand to vary hugely with circumstances. That there should be any risk at all of escalation to widespread nuclear war must be deeply disturbing, and decision-makers would always have to weigh it most anxiously. But a pair of key truths about it need to be recognized. The first is that the risk of escalation to large-scale nuclear war is inescapably present in any significant armed conflict between nuclear-capable powers, whoever may have started the conflict and whoever may first have used any particular category of weapon. The initiator of the conflict will always have physically available to him options for applying more force if he meets effective resistance. If the risk of escalation, whatever its degree of probability, is to be regarded as absolutely unacceptable, the necessary inference is that a state attacked by a substantial nuclear power must forgo military resistance. It must surrender, even if it has a nuclear armoury of its own. But the companion truth is that, as page 47 has noted, the risk of escalation is an inescapable burden also upon the aggressor. The exploitation of that burden is the crucial route, if conflict does break out, for managing it, to a tolerable outcome--the only route, indeed, intermediate between surrender and holocaust, and so the necessary basis for deterrence beforehand. The working out of plans to exploit escalation risk most effectively in deterring potential aggression entails further and complex issues. It is for example plainly desirable, wherever geography, politics, and available resources so permit without triggering arms races, to make provisions and dispositions that are likely to place the onus of making the bigger, and more evidently dangerous steps in escalation upon the aggressor volib wishes to maintain his attack, rather than upon the defender. (The customary shorthand for this desirable posture used to be 'escalation dominance'.) These issues are not further discussed here. But addressing them needs to start from acknowledgement that there are in any event no certainties or absolutes available, no options guaranteed to be risk-free and cost-free. Deterrence is not possible without escalation risk; and its presence can point to no automatic policy conclusion save for those who espouse outright pacifism and accept its consequences. Accident and Miscalculation Ensuring the safety and security of nuclear weapons plainly needs to be taken most seriously. Detailed information is understandably not published, but such direct evidence as there is suggests that it always has been so taken in every possessor state, with the inevitable occasional failures to follow strict procedures dealt with rigorously. Critics have nevertheless from time to time argued that the possibility of accident involving nuclear weapons is so substantial that it must weigh heavily in the entire evaluation of whether war-prevention structures entailing their existence should be tolerated at all. Two sorts of scenario are usually in question. The first is that of a single grave event involving an unintended nuclear explosion—a technical disaster at a storage site, for example, Dr the accidental or unauthorized launch of a delivery system with a live nuclear warhead. The second is that of some event—perhaps such an explosion or launch, or some other mishap such as malfunction or misinterpretation of radar signals or computer systems—initiating a sequence of response and counter-response that culminated in a nuclear exchange which no one had truly intended. No event that is physically possible can be said to be of absolutely zero probability (just as at an opposite extreme it is absurd to claim, as has been heard from distinguished figures, that nuclear-weapon use can be guaranteed to happen within some finite future span despite not having happened for over sixty years). But human affairs cannot be managed to the standard of either zero or total probability. We have to assess levels between those theoretical limits and weigh their reality and implications against other factors, in security planning as in everyday life. There have certainly been, across the decades since 1945, many known accidents involving nuclear weapons, from transporters skidding off roads to bomber aircraft crashing with or accidentally dropping the weapons they carried (in past days when such carriage was a frequent feature of readiness arrangements----it no longer is). A few of these accidents may have released into the nearby environment highly toxic material. None however has entailed a nuclear detonation. Some commentators suggest that this reflects bizarrely good fortune amid such massive activity and deployment over so many years. A more rational deduction from the facts of this long experience would however be that the probability of any accident triggering a nuclear explosion is extremely low. It might be further noted that the mechanisms needed to set off such an explosion are technically demanding, and that in a large number of ways the past sixty years have seen extensive improvements in safety arrangements for both the design and the handling of weapons. It is undoubtedly possible to see respects in which, after the cold war, some of the factors bearing upon risk may be new or more adverse; but some are now plainly less so. The years which the world has come through entirely without accidental or unauthorized detonation have included early decades in which knowledge was sketchier, precautions were less developed, and weapon designs were less ultra-safe than they later became, as well as substantial periods in which weapon numbers were larger, deployments more widespread and diverse, movements more frequent, and several aspects of doctrine and readiness arrangements more tense. Similar considerations apply to the hypothesis of nuclear war being mistakenly triggered by false alarm. Critics again point to the fact, as it is understood, of numerous occasions when initial steps in alert sequences for US nuclear forces were embarked upon, or at least called for, by, indicators mistaken or misconstrued. In none of these instances, it is accepted, did matters get at all near to nuclear launch--extraordinary good fortune again, critics have suggested. But the rival and more logical inference from hundreds of events stretching over sixty years of experience presents itself once more: that the probability of initial misinterpretation leading far towards mistaken launch is remote. Precisely because any nuclear-weapon possessor recognizes the vast gravity of any launch, release sequences have many steps, and human decision is repeatedly interposed as well as capping the sequences. To convey that because a first step was prompted the world somehow came close to accidental nuclear war is wild hyperbole, rather like asserting, when a tennis champion has lost his opening service game, that he was nearly beaten in straight sets. History anyway scarcely offers any ready example of major war started by accident even before the nuclear revolution imposed an order-of-magnitude increase in caution. It was occasionally conjectured that nuclear war might be triggered by the real but accidental or unauthorized launch of a strategic nuclear-weapon delivery system in the direction of a potential adversary. No such launch is known to have occurred in over sixty years. The probability of it is therefore very low. But even if it did happen, the further hypothesis of it initiating a general nuclear exchange is far-fetched. It fails to consider the real situation of decision-makers as pages 63-4 have brought out. The notion that cosmic holocaust might be mistakenly precipitated in this way belongs to science fiction.
Once a conflict begins, participants can feel pressure to act quickly, to control events and to manage the crisis in a way that meets its interests. This, in turn, can make the crisis escalate quickly and unpredictably. For example, if its command and control systems were protected from attack and offered redundant capabilities, and its forces were not vulnerable to an early strike by the adversary, then a nation could delay its response, await further information, and possibly seek alternate means to resolve the conflict.¶ On the other hand, if a country’s command and control infrastructure and its key forces were vulnerable to attack early in a conflict, then it might feel compelled to act quickly, using those forces before it lost them to attack, and before it had complete information about the intent and capabilities of its adversary in pursuing the conflict. Preferably, the capabilities or posture of a nation’s conventional and nuclear forces would not inherently add to this instability.¶ Specific U.S. crisis stability objectives in these scenarios may include fielding forces that 1) are not vulnerable, and do not make Chinese forces vulnerable to “use it or lose it” pressures, and 2) do not appear to be either vulnerable to or capable of political or military decapitation.¶ Both the United States and China have currently deployed their long-range nuclear forces in ways that would not leave them vulnerable to a first strike, and therefore, appear unlikely to undermine stability in a crisis. Chinese forces lack the accuracy to attack U.S. land-based forces and cannot effectively track and engage U.S. submarines that carry ballistic missiles (called SSBNs). Chinese long-range missiles are deployed in deeply buried silos, protected by rough terrain and mountains, or deployed on mobile launchers. Therefore, neither the United States nor China would experience pressure to use these weapons before losing them. Early warning and command and control systems, could, however, still be vulnerable to disruption on both sides. Therefore, efforts to disrupt these assets, or other factors, such as a desire to achieve tactical surprise, could stimulate prompt or accelerated responses as soon as a crisis unfolds.
ARLINGTON, Va. (NNS) -- Navy engineers are making final adjustments to a laser weapon prototype that will be the first of its kind to deploy aboard a ship late this summer.
Lasers have great potential as weapons. Laser beams travel at the speed of light, so no rocket will ever outrun them. They are also remarkably cheap to generate—a couple dollars a pop, compared to launching a five, six or even seven-figure missile. And as long as you've got electrical power, a laser cannon will never run out of ammunition. Lasers are also versatile. They don't have to blow up a target to neutralize it. They can fry electronics, sensors and navigation systems.
If the United States wants to escape the danger zone in its strategic competition with China — disproving Beijing’s fancy that it can rule the Western Pacific — decommissioning the U.S. Navy’s fastest, most capacious combat logistics ships is no way to do it. Just the opposite. It telegraphs that America is no longer serious about fighting far from North America for long spans of time. Competitors will take note.
How should the United States manage its partnerships with global navies? What do these partnerships offer the United States? These questions have animated discussions of maritime strategy over the last decade, with strong partisans landing on different sides of each question. The latest blows follow Admiral James Foggo’s article in Proceedings: “Forging a Global Network of Navies”.
Earlier this week, the U.S. Navy announced a contract with General Dynamics and Huntington Ingalls to build ten new Virginia-class submarines over the next ten years. The deal, one of the largest in the history of military acquisition, ensures a continued global role for the USN’s silent service.
In the last debate, Governor Romney made the claim that the US Navy is the smallest it’s been since 1916 implying that the US Navy is regressing in terms of overall strength. How accurate is this claim? We recently compiled a new data set on naval capabilities and created a measure of state naval strength for all countries from 1865 to 2011. As such, we are in a position to address the claims of the Romney campaign. Broadly stated, our measure of state naval power is based on a state’s total number of warships (non-fighting ships are excluded) and each ship’s available firepower. To make comparisons over time, our annual measure is based on available firepower within the international system in that year. (For more information, see our paper here.) In 1916, the US controlled roughly 11% of the world’s naval power. This is an impressive number that ranks the US third in naval strength behind the UK (34%) and Germany (19%), and just ahead of France (10%). What about the US navy in 2011? In 2011, the US controlled roughly 50% of the world’s naval power putting it in a comfortable lead in naval power ahead of Russia (11%). The US Navy has decreased in absolute size as Governor Romney argues (although this decline has been ongoing since the end of Cold War). U.S. warships are more powerful now than in the past, as President Obama implied. However, neither the number of warships nor the power of our ships is what is most important for understanding military and political influence. It is relative military power that matters most. In this respect, the U.S. navy is far stronger now than in 1916.
While the carrier provides the Nation with a sovereign, mobile airfield that can be positioned at the time and place of the Commander-in-Chief’s choosing, the true combat power of this naval asset resides in the composition of its Air Wing. A carrier like the USS Enterprise can have a service life that stretches from the Cuban Missile Crisis to the War on Terror, but it’s enduring utility is enabled not just by its hull-life, but by the continued modernization of aviation assets found on its flight deck. Given the scope of China’s counter-intervention modernization effort and Iran’s own anti-access/area-denial investments, I believe the future air wing must comprise a mix of manned and unmanned aircraft that provide extended-range operations, persistence, stealth, payload, and electronic warfare. Central to this mix is the Navy’s unmanned carrier-launched airborne surveillance and strike (UCLASS) system. The fundamental question we face going forward is not about the utility of unmanned aviation to the future Air Wing, but the type of unmanned platform that the UCLASS program will deliver and the specific capabilities this vital asset will provide the Combatant Commander. Given the likely operational environment of the 2020s and beyond - including in both the Western Pacific Ocean and Persian Gulf - I believe strongly that the Nation needs to procure a Unmanned Combat Air Vehicles (UCAV) platform that can operate as a long-range surveillance and strike asset in the contested and denied A2/AD environments of the future. To achieve this, such a system should have broadband, all-aspect stealth, be capable of automated aerial refueling, and have integrated surveillance and strike functionality. Unfortunately, the current direction this program is taking will leave our Naval forces with a platform that I fear will not address the emerging anti-access/area-denial (A2/AD) challenges to U.S. power projection that originally motivated creation of the Navy Unmanned Combat Air System (N-UCAS) program during the 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR), and which were reaffirmed in both the 2010 QDR and 2012 Defense Strategic Guidance. Getting this program correct today and not returning later to address the critical operational challenges facing the carrier in the coming decade is one of the most fundamental decisions the United States can do to secure its enduring advantage in power-projection. Given this important oversight question, on Wednesday afternoon the Seapower and Projection Forces subcommittee, which I Chair, will conduct a hearing with both Navy and independent witnesses to explore this topic in-depth. Specifically, the disproportionate emphasis in the requirements on unrefueled endurance to enable continuous intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) support to the Carrier Strike Group (CSG) would result in an aircraft design that would have serious deficiencies in both survivability and internal weapons payload capacity and flexibility. Furthermore, the cost limits for the aircraft are more consistent with a much less capable aircraft and will not enable the Navy to build a relevant vehicle that leverages readily available and mature technology. In short, developing a new carrier-based unmanned aircraft that is primarily another unmanned ISR sensor that cannot operate in medium to high-level threat environments would be a missed opportunity and inconsistent with the 2012 Defense Strategic Guidance which called for the United States to “maintain its ability to project power in areas in which our access and freedom to operate are challenged.” The House Armed Services Committee (HASC), in its recent markup of the FY15 National Defense Authorization Act, agreed with this assessment and concluded that it believes the Navy and indeed the Nation require a long-range, survivable unmanned ISR-strike aircraft as an integral part of the carrier air wings. In contrast, the HASC also determined that developing a new carrier-based unmanned aircraft that is primarily another flying sensor would be a missed opportunity with profound consequences for the practical utility of the carrier and thus for the nation. The question of UCLASS is not just one of design and capability; it is also about the role and responsibility the Congress has in cultivating, supporting, and protecting military innovation. Like with the shift from cavalry to mechanized forces, sailing ships to steam-powered vessels, the prioritization of the carrier over battleships, or adopting unmanned aerial vehicles in the late 1990s, ideas that initiate difficult changes and disrupt current practices are often first opposed by organizations and bureaucracies that are inclined to preserve the status quo. I believe the Congress has a unique role to help push the Department and the Services in directions that, while challenging, will ultimately benefit our national security and defense policy. I therefore intend to use the subcommittee hearing to explore not just the UCLASS program, but the broader utility a UCAV can have on the Navy’s ability to continue to project power from the aircraft carrier and the implications for the power projection mission in the future if we proceed down the current course.
The United States Navy has a history of leadership in energy innovation, from the transition from sail to steam, the development of coal and then oil burning power plants, or the move to nuclear power more than half a century ago. The propulsion of our ships, aircraft, and equipment is a vital operational concern. But power and energy is also an issue of national and international security. My responsibility as Secretary of the Navy is to ensure that the Navy and Marine Corps have the right people, with the right training and the right tools to defend our country. To accomplish those things, I focus on four priorities: people, platforms, power, and partnerships. In Washington I’m sometimes asked, why is power or energy policy in there? It ought to be obvious. Without the energy to power our platforms, we might not be there when it matters. Uniquely, naval forces offer the capability to provide presence. Presence means being in the right place, not just at the right time, but all the time. Presence helps deter potential conflicts, while helping to control escalation when tensions begin to rise. Naval presence is persistent and does not infringe on anyone’s sovereign territory. Our Navy and Marine Corps are our nation’s insurance policy across the globe and they give our leaders options in times of crisis. Related Kayyem: Pentagon is stopped from going green In today’s world access to energy and fuel can be a diplomatic pressure point and can be, and is, used as a geostrategic weapon. Whether we’re talking about threats against the shipping lanes in the Middle East, or the headlines we see in the papers today about European dependence on Russian gas supplies and the effect on negotiations over Ukraine, energy and power are only becoming more important to international security. Here in the United States, with domestic production up and new oil and gas reserves being discovered, energy still remains a security concern. Even if we were able to produce every single drop of oil or gas that America needs domestically, we cannot control the price. Oil is the ultimate global commodity, often traded on world markets based on speculation and rumor. Prices run up at the slightest sign of global instability, as we have seen at the gas pump in recent weeks. Commodities traders call this a “security premium.” Each $1 increase in the price of a barrel of oil results in a $30 million bill for the Navy and Marine Corps. In 2011 and 2012 price fluctuations added an unplanned $3 billion to the Department of Defense’s fuel expenses. The potential bills from that “security premium” can mean that we will have fewer resources for maintaining and training our military. In 2009 I established formal energy goals for the Department of the Navy to help drive the Navy and Marine Corps to strengthen our combat capability by using energy more efficiently and by diversifying our sources of power. From the introduction of our biofuel powered Great Green Fleet at the Rim of the Pacific Exercise in 2012 to the Marines’ introduction of sustainable expeditionary power systems which they used in combat in Afghanistan, we have made real progress over the last few years. Looking to the future we are cooperating with the Departments of Energy and Agriculture on a national biofuels initiative which will provide up to twenty five percent of the Navy’s fuel needs from a 50/50 blend of biofuel and conventional fuels at prices that are competitive with today’s fossil fuel based products. In the 21st century, as much as any other time in our history, power matters. The Navy and Marine Corps are working hard to ensure that we use energy efficiently and effectively in order to maintain or combat capability and improve our strategic independence. The energy to fuel our ships, our aircraft, and our bases helps guarantee our presence, and it helps guarantee our ability to respond and give the President options in any crisis. It helps us ensure that the United States Navy and Marine Corps remain the most powerful expeditionary fighting force in the world.
The threats to peace and order on the global seas are growing. China’s authoritarian government launched 17 new warships in 2013 and is in the process of producing 30 more this year. One of the country’s aircraft carriers nearly grazed a U.S. missile cruiser off the Chinese coastline in December, prompting U.S. Pacific Fleet Commander Adm. Harry Harris to bemoan China’s “increasingly assertive behavior in the region.” Meanwhile, Russia’s maritime military presence is also on the upswing. Earlier this year, a Russian fighter jet brazenly harassed one of our destroyers, the USS Donald G. Cook, in the Black Sea for 90 minutes. In addition, an Iranian admiral recently openly acknowledged his forces were preparing to target U.S. aircraft carriers because they’re “a symbol of America’s might.” This trend cannot be allowed to continue apace. These are dangerous countries bent on disrupting the international order America and her allies have worked so hard to uphold. Unfortunately, national policymakers have not responded well to these mounting challenges. Amid tightening budgets, many of the development projects for new, more effective weapons and ships have been scaled back or canceled entirely. Pentagon officials are moving to mothball half the existing cruisers. There’s been serious talk of decommissioning an aircraft carrier, and the Navy is rushing to design a new frigate-sized ship in hopes of shoring up savings. As a result of policymakers’ inaction and apathy, America’s naval capacities are fading. As Samuel Locklear, the admiral in charge of U.S. Pacific Command, recently put it, the “historic dominance that most of us in our careers have enjoyed is diminishing.” A big part of the problem is that policymakers thought the Navy would be operating mainly in friendly waters close to the coast — the “littorals,” as the sailors say. The Navy started designing a littoral combat ship back in 2001 and planned to restock the fleet with 50 of these low-cost, smaller ships. So far there are just four.
The single most important contributor to the U.S.'s military dominance is the country's powerful navy, which gives America the ability to project hard power just about anywhere in the world. And this ability owes a lot to the Navy's unparalleled fleet of aircraft carriers. The U.S. has 19 carriers. The rest of the world has only 12 aircraft carriers combined. The U.S. carriers are also larger and more technically advanced than any other country's. China's sole carrier, for instance, is a retrofitted Soviet-era Ukrainian carrier that was originally supposed to be an off-shore casino. Our friends at GlobalSecurity.org created a chart that captures not just the scope, but the size of the U.S. aircraft carriers in comparison to the rest of the world. It's pretty stark, and gives an idea of just how much of a gap in conventional military power there is between the U.S. and everyone else.
Fortunately, it’s not too late to change course and restore America’s maritime might. The Navy must be prepared to meet force on force with the ships, aircraft and technologies geared to combat rising threats. To start, our military needs to prepare for contested seas. The long-range shipbuilding plan is the place to do it. That plan should hold fast to the tough ships, such as carriers, destroyers and amphibious ships that operate well anywhere and are constantly called when trouble breaks out. Legislators need to be talking about how to afford new ships in light of fiscal tightening. The Navy is planning to purchase several new types of vessels all at once starting around 2018, at an estimated tab of $18 billion to $24 billion per year. Appropriately prioritizing will be crucial. The top priority needs to be the production and improvement of aircraft carriers. as they’re particularly effective at combating the maritime technologies being developed by hostile regimes. Specifically, carriers need to add advanced planes such as the F-35 strike fighter and E-2D radar plane. Officials also need to critically examine the existing fleet of littoral combat ships. The Pentagon has proposed cutting the buy for such vessels from 54 to 32 out of concerns for their ability to defend themselves against more advanced military adversaries in the Asia-Pacific. Finally, the “DDG-51 Burke” class of destroyers — the defining characteristic of which is robust, multidimensional firepower — needs to play a bigger role in our naval operations. The Burke DDGs are uniquely equipped to counter the diversity of threats now posed on the open seas. Plans to improve and expand our national naval capacities need to come back to the center of the international security debate. Russia, China and Iran are all heavily investing in their maritime military capabilities. U.S. commanders from the Pacific to the Mediterranean to the Persian Gulf are demanding more and better ships. If the United States doesn’t heed their request, the Navy’s power to combat foreign threats and back up diplomatic outreach in once-peaceful waters will continue to dwindle.
As part of efforts to boost port security here, the US Embassy in Georgetown facilitated a week-long workshop on auditing management systems. The training was conducted in partnership with the US Coast Guard and the Maritime Administration of Guyana (MARAD). It represents the third of four courses delivered to Guyanese officials from multiple agencies. The workshop was based on international standards for auditing and will assist employees of the port, Customs, port Police, health, the Guyanese Coast Guard, and MARAD to perform effective inspections and audits and ensure that ports remain secure. Secure ports reduce the risk of threats to the shipping community, which in turn keeps the price of shipped goods lower by potentially reducing insurance costs to shippers, and reducing the time it takes to get cargo in and out of Guyana’s ports. The efforts of Guyana’s newly-trained auditors will strengthen the security of Guyana’s ports by identifying security vulnerabilities and developing solutions through the auditing of security management practices. The broad representation of members from Guyanese ports and the Guyanese Government represent a strong commitment to port security and the facilitation of trade between Guyana and the US. The programme, funded through the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative (CBSI), helps strengthen capacity and provide practical skills to relevant security officials working in this critically important area. Through such CBSI partnerships, the US and Guyana seek to enhance the bilateral security relationship to create a partnership to combat transnational crime, develop strong security institutions in Guyana, and advance the safety and security of the citizens of Guyana.
Maritime domain awareness and information sharing. DHS agencies along with other port partners have taken actions to enhance visibility over the maritime domain and facilitate cooperation among partners by collecting, assessing and sharing key information. However, some challenges remain in implementing the tools necessary to maintain this focus and increase coordination among stakeholders. For example, in multiple reports since 2011, GAO found the Coast Guard's weak management of technology acquisitions—that were focused on enhancing maritime awareness and increasing communication among partners— resulted in these acquisitions not fully achieving their intended purposes. DHS concurred with GAO's recommendations for addressing these weaknesses. Security in domestic ports. Since 9/11, DHS components have taken a wide variety of actions to better secure domestic ports. For example, the Coast Guard has assessed risks to cruise ships in accordance with DHS guidance and is providing escorts for high-risk vessels such as cruise ships and ferries while CBP is reviewing passenger and crew data to target inspections. In addition, since 2002, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has provided almost $2.9 billion in federal funding through the Port Security Grant Program (PSGP) to help defray the cost of implementing security efforts in many ports and has established measures to improve the administration of the PSGP. However, in 2014 FEMA stated that it is unable—due to resource constraints—to annually measure reduced vulnerability attributed to enhanced PSGP-funded security measures. Meanwhile, the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and the Coast Guard have been administering a program requiring maritime workers to obtain a biometric identification card to gain access to certain facilities. However, in 2011, GAO recommended that DHS assess internal controls to identify actions needed to address, among other things, weaknesses governing enrollment and background checks. As of March 2014 this action had not been completed. Protection of the global supply chain. DHS agencies, especially CBP, have taken steps to enhance the security of the global supply chain—particularly for cargo bound for the United States. Efforts have focused on assessing and mitigating cargo risk before it enters U.S. ports by better targeting and scanning cargo, and establishing security partnerships with the foreign countries and companies that ship cargo to the United States. However, in multiple reports since 2005, GAO found that DHS programs focused on protecting the global supply chain have been implemented with varying degrees of success and that many would benefit from the DHS agencies conducting further assessments of the programs, among other things. GAO has made recommendations to address these issues and DHS has concurred or generally concurred with most of these recommendations and has taken actions to address many of them.
"Every single container does get screened. Everything that comes off the ship goes through radiation detection equipment," added Holmes. The ports of Los Angeles have different high-tech devices that look for bombs, chemical and biological weapons. Michael McMullen with the Port of Long Beach says technology is a big component of security. "Most of the security that we do today is really done almost in a virtual state," he said. McMullen says there are underwater sonar sensors, high-tech radars that detect every ship within 11 kilometers of the port and hundreds of cameras above ground. In a room filled with computers and video monitors of all sizes, security analysts can track everything that goes on in and around the port complex. The port has shared the technology with personnel from Latin America and Asia so they can learn how these high tech systems are integrated and apply them to their own port security. "Ports may all be a little bit different, but what we're trying to do is very similar," Holmes explained. To share information, John Holmes says the Port of Los Angeles held a port security summit last year with countries that included China, Korea and Israel. Holmes says ports around the world are vulnerable, using the 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai, India as an example. "In Mumbai, the attacks actually came from the water," he said. Security experts say exchanging information will help them stay current with all the new high-tech devices on the market. At a technology conference near Los Angeles, Fred Aldrich is trying to sell a container scanning system. It would go on a ship and scan stacks of containers before they reach land. "Our system would be installed at the foreign ports and scanning and detection happens 24/7 autonomously," Aldrich said. Craig Crawford with 3-D Image Tek, is trying to find buyers for his machine that converts video from 2-D to 3-D. He says 3-D images provide depth and detail. He says it can be used for night surveillance or even to diffuse a bomb. "It actually puts human eyes right on the threat then they can manipulate it just like a surgeon would be during a surgery looking at the wires identifying the threat," said Crawford. Port of Long Beach's Michael McMullen says in the next two years, he expects 3-D technology to be one component of security at his port that will help improve communication by providing even more detailed information.
The truth is hard to bear, but the facts are clear. America’s wars have been fought in order to advance Washington’s power, the profits of bankers and armaments industries, and the fortunes of US companies. Marine General Smedley Butler said, “I served in all commissioned ranks from a second Lieutenant to a Major General. And during that time, I spent most of my time being a high-class muscle man for Big Business, for Wall Street, and for the bankers. In short, I was a racketeer for capitalism.” It is more or less impossible to commemorate the war dead without glorifying them, and it is impossible to glorify them without glorifying their wars. For the entirety of the 21st century the US has been at war, not war against massed armies or threats to American freedom, but wars against civilians, against women, children, and village elders, and wars against our own liberty. Elites with a vested interest in these wars tell us that the wars will have to go on for another 20 to 30 years before we defeat “the terrorist threat.” This, of course, is nonsense. There was no terrorist threat until Washington began trying to create terrorists by military attacks, justified by lies, on Muslim populations. Washington succeeded with its war lies to the point that Washington’s audacity and hubris have outgrown Washington’s judgment. By overthrowing the democratically elected government in Ukraine, Washington has brought the United States into confrontation with Russia. This is a confrontation that could end badly, perhaps for Washington and perhaps for the entire world. If Gaddafi and Assad would not roll over for Washington, why does Washington think Russia will? The Bush and Obama regimes have destroyed America’s reputation with their incessant lies and violence against other peoples. The world sees Washington as the prime threat. Worldwide polls consistently show that people around the world regard the US and Israel as posing the greatest threat to peace. The countries that Washington’s propaganda declares to be “rogue states” and the “axis of evil,” such as Iran and North Korea, are far down the list when the peoples in the world are consulted. It could not be more clear that the world does not believe Washington’s self-serving propaganda. The world sees the US and Israel as the rogue elements. The US and Israel are the only two in the world that are in the grip of ideologies. The US is in the grip of the Neoconservative ideology which has declared the US to be the “exceptional, indispensable country” chosen by history to exercise hegemony over all others. This ideology is buttressed by the Brzezinski and Wolfowitz doctrines that are the basis of US foreign policy. The Israeli government is in the grip of the Zionist ideology that declares a “greater Israel” from the Nile to the Euphrates. Many Israelis themselves do not accept this ideology, but it is the ideology of the “settlers” and those who control the Israeli government. Ideologies are important causes of war. Just as the Hitlerian ideology of German superiority is mirrored in the Neoconservative ideology of US superiority, the Communist ideology that the working class is superior to the capitalist class is mirrored in the Zionist ideology that Israelis are superior to Palestinians. Zionists have never heard of squatters’ rights and claim that recent Jewish immigrants into Palestine – invaders really – have the right to land occupied by others for millennia. Washington’s and Israel’s doctrines of superiority over others do not sit very well with the “others.” When Obama declared in a speech that Americans are the exceptional people, Russia’s President Putin responded, “God created us all equal.” To the detriment of its population, the Israeli government has made endless enemies. Israel has effectively isolated itself in the world. Israel’s continued existence depends entirely on the willingness and ability of Washington to protect Israel. This means that Israel’s power is derivative of Washington’s power. Washington’s power is a different story. As the only economy standing after WWII, the US dollar became the world money. This role for the dollar has given Washington financial hegemony over the world, the main source of Washington’s power. As other countries rise, Washington’s hegemony is imperiled. To prevent other countries from rising, Washington invokes the Brzezinski and Wolfowitz doctrines. To be brief, the Brzezinski doctrine says that in order to remain the only superpower, Washington must control the Eurasian land mass. Brzezinski is willing for this to occur peacefully by suborning the Russian government into Washington’s empire. “A loosely confederated Russia . . . a decentralized Russia would be less susceptible to imperial mobilization.” In other words, break up Russia into associations of semi-autonomous states whose politicians can be suborned by Washington’s money. Brzezinski propounded “a geo-strategy for Eurasia.” In Brzezinski’s strategy, China and “a confederated Russia” are part of a “transcontinental security framework,” managed by Washington in order to perpetuate the role of the US as the world’s only superpower. I once asked my colleague, Brzezinski, that if everyone was allied with us, who were we organized against? My question surprised him, because I think that Brzezinski remains caught up in Cold War strategy even after the demise of the Soviet Union. In Cold War thinking it was important to have the upper hand or else be at risk of being eliminated as a player. The importance of prevailing became all consuming, and this consuming drive survived the Soviet collapse. Prevailing over others is the only foreign policy that Washington knows. The mindset that America must prevail set the stage for the Neoconservatives and their 21st century wars, which, with Washington’s overthrow of the democratically elected government of Ukraine, has resulted in a crisis that has brought Washington into direct conflict with Russia. I know the strategic institutes that serve Washington. I was the occupant of the William E.Simon Chair in Political Economy, Center for Strategic and International Studies, for a dozen years. The idea is prevalent that Washington must prevail over Russia in Ukraine or Washington will lose prestige and its superpower status. The idea of prevailing always leads to war once one power thinks it has prevailed. The path to war is reinforced by the Wolfowitz Doctrine. Paul Wolfowitz, the neoconservative intellectual who formulated US military and foreign policy doctrine, wrote among many similar passages: “Our first objective is to prevent the re-emergence of a new rival, either on the territory of the former Soviet Union or elsewhere [China] that poses a threat on the order of that posed formerly by the Soviet Union. This is a dominant consideration underlying the new regional defense strategy and requires that we endeavor to prevent any hostile power from dominating a region whose resources would, under consolidated control, be sufficient to generate global power.” In the Wolfowitz Doctrine, any other strong country is defined as a threat and a power hostile to the US regardless of how willing that country is to get along with the US for mutual benefit. The difference between Brzezinski and the Neoconservatives is that Brzezinski wants to suborn Russia and China by including them in the empire as important elements whose voices would be heard, If only for diplomatic reasons, whereas the Neoconservatives are prepared to rely on military force combined with internal subversion orchestrated with US financed NGOs and even terrorist organizations. Neither the US nor Israel is embarrassed by their worldwide reputations as posing the greatest threat. In fact, both are proud to be recognized as the greatest threats. The foreign policy of both is devoid of any diplomacy. US and Israeli foreign policy rests on violence alone. Washington tells countries to do as Washington says or be “bombed into the stone age.” Israel declares all Palestinians, even women and children, to be “terrorists,” and proceeds to shoot them down in the streets, claiming that Israel is merely protecting itself against terrorists. Israel, which does not recognize the existence of Palestine as a country, covers up its crimes with the claim that Palestinians do not accept the existence of Israel. “We don’t need no stinking diplomacy. We got power.” This is the attitude that guarantees war, and that is where the US is taking the world. The prime minister of Britain, the chancellor of Germany, and the president of France are Washington’s enablers. They provide the cover for Washington. Instead of war crimes, Washington has “coalitions of the willing” and military invasions that bring “democracy and women’s rights” to non-compliant countries. China gets much the same treatment. A country with four times the US population but a smaller prison population, China is constantly criticized by Washington as an “authoritarian state.” China is accused of human rights abuses while US police brutalize the US population. The problem for humanity is that Russia and China are not Libya and Iraq. These two countries possess strategic nuclear weapons. Their land mass greatly exceeds that of the US. The US, which was unable to successfully occupy Baghdad or Afghanistan, has no prospect of prevailing against Russia and China in conventional warfare. Washington will push the nuclear button. What else can we expect from a government devoid of morality? The world has never experienced rogue elements comparable to Washington and Israel. Both governments are prepared to murder anyone and everyone. Look at the crisis that Washington has created in Ukraine and the dangers thereof. On May 23, 2014, Russia’s President Putin spoke to the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum, a three-day gathering of delegations from 62 countries and CEOs from 146 of the largest Western corporations. Putin did not speak of the billions of dollars in trade deals that were being formalized. Instead Putin spoke of the crisis that Washington had brought to Russia, and he criticized Europe for being Washington’s vassals for supporting Washington’s propaganda against Russia and Washington’s interference in vital Russian interests. Putin was diplomatic in his language, but the message that powerful economic interests from the US and Europe received is that it will lead to trouble if Washington and European governments continue to ignore Russia’s concerns and continue to act as if they can interfere in Russia’s vital interests as if Russia did not exist. The heads of these large corporations will carry this message back to Washington and European capitals. Putin made it clear that the lack of dialogue with Russia could lead to the West making the mistake of putting Ukraine in NATO and establishing missile bases on Russia’s border with Ukraine. Putin has learned that Russia cannot rely on good will from the West, and Putin made it clear, short of issuing a threat, that Western military bases in Ukraine are unacceptable. Washington will continue to ignore Russia. However, European capitals will have to decide whether Washington is pushing them into conflict with Russia that is against European interests. Thus, Putin is testing European politicians to determine if there is sufficient intelligence and independence in Europe for a rapprochement. If Washington in its overbearing arrogance and hubris forces Putin to write off the West, the Russian/Chinese strategic alliance, which is forming to counteract Washington’s hostile policy of surrounding both countries with military bases, will harden into preparation for the inevitable war.
Problem number one is radiation. Interplanetary space is filled with solar and cosmic radiation. The former originates from the Sun and fluctuates on an eleven-year cycle. The latter originates outside of our solar system from cataclysmic star events and black holes. Both are potentially deadly.¶ NASA has estimated that a three-year round-trip and visit to Mars by astronauts would expose them to about one Siemen of radiation, the recommended lifetime dosage. Annual exposure on Earth at sea level is in the milliSiemens range. The effects of radiation exposure include cataracts, increased likelihood of cancer, and sterility. Without radiation shielding on Mars, colonists will be doomed to very shortened lifespans and would be unlikely to reproduce. Children, if born, would have even more problems because rapidly developing cells are even more sensitive to radiation effects.¶ The reasons that radiation is such a problem on Mars but not on Earth arise from the two things that shield us Earthlings from radiation: our atmosphere and the Earth’s magnetic field. The Martian atmosphere is about 1/100 that of the Earth. Essentially all radiation arrives on the surface. Mars has no magnetic field. Scientists postulate that it is solid to the core and so has no liquid interior to generate a magnetic field. The Earth’s magnetic field deflects arriving ionic cosmic rays and solar radiation, although gamma rays are unaffected. This deflection to our polar radiation is the reason that we see the aurora borealis near our north pole but not near the equator. Those light displays are caused by energetic ions impacting the atmosphere.¶ The proposed Mars One habitats have no evident radiation shielding, and radiation is not mentioned on their website. The best shielding would be a thick layer of liquid hydrogen, but water can also function reasonably well. Oddly, metal shielding, unless very thick, makes cosmic radiation worse because the rays hit metal atom nuclei and create a shower of new radiation from what was a single ray.¶ The colonists could go underground to avoid radiation, but Mars One has no such plans. They do hope to build extensions to the shelters from the Martian soil. We don’t know how feasible this plan is or whether the thickness of the soil walls will be sufficient to avoid significant radiation damage.¶ Moving on past the radiation issues, which may never be adequately resolved, you will encounter a number of more mundane issues. These fall into two areas: physical and psychological.¶ Physical Problems¶ The physical problems have to do with life support and expansion. Life requires air, water, food, and shelter. With one percent of Earth’s atmosphere, Mars has an atmosphere that we cannot breathe. It’s mostly carbon dioxide (95%) anyway with oxygen only as a trace component. Even if you compressed it, you still could not breathe it. The colonists must live in a pressurized environment and must scrub the carbon dioxide (CO2) from the air to prevent stress and eventual death from hypercapnia. Oxygen must constantly be generated from some source to make up for oxygen consumed by the colonists.¶ Plants grown for food can perform the functions of carbon dioxide removal and oxygen generation, but early plans for Mars One suggest that the space allotted for plants may not be sufficient for these purposes and must be supplanted by mechanical and chemical processes, which will require power.¶ Substantial supplies of water will be required to support even four colonists who will be living in a water-poor environment. The interior of the habitat may actually be moist because it will not take much water to saturate the small atmosphere contained there. Most edible plants transpire, and a moist atmosphere will reduce their water requirements. Water will come from three sources: water carried on the mission, water recycled from colonists, and water “mined” from the Martian soil.¶ This last source may be a problem because the best location for water is near the Martian poles, but the best place for solar energy is near the Martian equator. We do not yet know if reasonable amounts of water exist below the Martian surface at the equator. Water is also the most likely source of oxygen. Electrolysis of water produces hydrogen and oxygen gases. Therefore, water is necessary for both its own value and for replenishing air. Because colonists must venture outside and so step through an airlock, losing air in the process, and because the habitat will certainly have at least minor leaks, air must be constantly replaced.¶ The initial six habitat modules have been allocated in pairs. One pair has been reserved for food production. The exact nature of the plants to be used has not been described by Mars One. Unless colonists have a decent radiation shield, the plants will neither grow nor reproduce well. Assuming such a shield is available, the plants must convert sunshine to edible plant matter. The solar intensity is about 43% of that on Earth, which will necessitate the use of efficient plants that can grow well in eternally cloudy Earth climes. Most food plants must have strong sunlight. Hybrids may be developed to compensate.¶ Even so, it’s unclear whether the amount of space allocated for food production will suffice to feed the entire colony. Even if the space is adequate, the diet will be monotonous. The inefficiency of animals for food sources means that the entire diet must be vegan. Yeast or similar organisms must be grown as well to provide B12, which cannot be obtained from strictly plant sources. Colonists will never again see a steak or filet of fish. They will have eggs or milk products. They won’t even have the produce of trees – nuts, apples, citrus, etc. There will be no pepper, cinnamon, or vanilla.¶ Only the most efficient plants can be utilized for food on Mars. The variety will certainly be limited. We cannot yet tell if colonists can grow some ginger or basil to help alleviate the monotony of diet.¶ Shelter will remain a serious problem for the foreseeable future. Four people will inhabit six small modules of which four are reserved for mechanical and food purposes. The shelter must remain airtight and insulating at all times. Temperatures on the Martian surface drop to far below freezing at night. Although the atmosphere is extremely thin, very strong winds create sandstorms that can erode anything exposed outside, including the shelters. The materials from which shelters are built must be strong enough to withstand the winds but light enough to ship to Mars, a real engineering challenge.¶ NASA's Curiosity Rover¶ NASA’s Curiosity Rover¶ Heat will be lost through the walls of the habitat even with the best insulation. This heat must be replaced. The Mars colonists will find absolutely no coal, no oil, and no natural gas to use as an energy source. Only solar and wind energy will be available unless they bring along a nuclear power generator. Small ones, such as is being used by NASA’s Curiosity rover, can provide some power but not enough for this purpose. Heat will be a serious issue for Mars One. Their plans call for large flexible solar panels to be rolled out onto the Martian surface to capture the wan sunlight. The plans do not show calculations for expected energy capture during the long Martian winters. With a “year” twice as long as ours, winters are also twice as long.¶ In addition, batteries must store this captured solar energy. Lots of batteries will be needed to hold enough energy for heating and other purposes such as oxygen generation throughout the Martian nights. The Mars One information does not include battery specifications. Even the most efficient batteries are heavy and will have to be lifted from Earth to Mars at $10,000 per pound.¶ The colonists must work outside of their habitat in the harsh Martian environment and so must have Mars suits that are the equivalent of space suits. Maintaining these will be crucial to extending the colony. Without petrochemical sources, it’s unclear what materials will be used to replace the plastic components of these suits.¶ If the colony is to be self-sustaining, it must be able to expand using local materials. Water is too precious to use for making concrete or even adobe if the basic materials could be obtained. Note that cement requires lots of heat to make. To make iron, iron ore and enormous amounts of energy are needed. Converting iron to steel requires more energy and lots of carbon, but Mars has no fossil fuels as sources of carbon. Similarly, copper, zinc, and tin all require massive amounts of energy – far more than the solar arrays will provide.¶ Colonists will have to expand their solar arrays as they expand the colony – if such expansion can be done at all. The high-technology required for manufacturing these arrays will be far beyond the capabilities of the Martian colony. With nothing to export, the colonists will have to depend on Earth to send them the needed materials and will become interplanetary beggars. If they have children, they’ll have to expand their food tanks. Of what will they construct them? Indeed, what building materials will the colonists have for any purpose, even for making cooking pots or children’s toys?¶ Medical issues have not even been considered. The colonists would not have any access to modern medicine. They would have to be carefully screened for genetic factors that predispose to disease. Medical problems that we can handle readily here would result in death on Mars.¶ Psychological Pressures¶ Even if power, air, water, food, shelter, and building materials can be resolved, a very unlikely result, the colonists must face extreme psychological pressures. A single small error by one colonist can kill them all. This could happen on any day.¶ Only digital material could be imported from Earth on a regular basis. With sufficient power, the colonists could watch videos and listen to music. However, conversation with Earth-bound families and friends would not be possible. The round-trip delay for radio transmission is between 6 and 40 minutes. Say, “Hello,” and you hear a response 20 minutes later on average. All communication with Earth would be asynchronous.¶ What would it take to make life on Mars bearable? How could you overcome the monotony of food, of view, of company, of smells, of cramped living spaces? You would never smell a pine forest again or see the ocean. There are no “amber waves of grain” or even cityscapes. You’ll have no blue skies or clouds and no hope of ever experiencing them again in person. You’ll be subject to extreme cabin fever.¶ It looks like Mars colonists will be in a constant state of stress from a long list of sources. How can you stand this sort of stress? The answer typically lies in hope for the future, in the belief that you’re building something for your children and future generations. Unless the problems of radiation, power, water, building materials, repairing and replacing Mars suits, and the rest are solved, you’ve just sentenced yourself to a life in prison, and that prison is the closest thing to hell that any living person can experience over protracted periods. Without hope, Mars One is doomed today.
The High Frontier, Redux, by Charlie Stross: ...I write SF for a living. Possibly because of this, folks seem to think I ought to be an enthusiastic proponent of space exploration and space colonization. Space exploration? Yep, ... I'm all in favour of advancing the scientific enterprise. But actual space colonisation is another matter entirely...¶ Historically, crossing oceans and setting up farmsteads on new lands conveniently stripped of indigenous inhabitants ... has been a cost-effective proposition. But the scale factor involved in space travel is strongly counter-intuitive. ...¶ [I]f we're looking for habitable real estate..., [w]hile exoplanets are apparently common as muck, terrestrial planets are harder to find; Gliese 581c, the first such to be detected (and it looks like a pretty weird one, at that), is roughly 20.4 light years away, or using our metaphor, about ten miles.¶ Try to get a handle on this: [using the metaphor] it takes us 2-5 years to travel two inches. But the proponents of interstellar travel are talking about journeys of ten miles. That's the first point I want to get across: that if the distances involved in interplanetary travel are enormous, and ... the distances and times involved in interstellar travel are mind-numbing.¶ This is not to say that interstellar travel is impossible; quite the contrary. But to do so effectively you need either (a) outrageous amounts of cheap energy, or (b) highly efficient robot probes, or (c) a magic wand. And in the absence of (c) you're not going to get any news back from the other end in less than decades. Even if (a) is achievable, or by means of (b) we can send self-replicating factories and have them turn distant solar systems into hives of industry, and more speculatively find some way to transmit human beings there, they are going to have zero net economic impact on our circumstances (except insofar as sending them out costs us money). ...¶ The long and the short of what I'm trying to get across is quite simply that, in the absence of technology indistinguishable from magic — magic tech that, ... from today's perspective appear to play fast and loose with the laws of physics — interstellar travel for human beings is near-as-dammit a non-starter. And while I won't rule out the possibility of such seemingly-magical technology appearing at some time in the future, the conclusion I draw as a science fiction writer is that if interstellar colonization ever happens, it will not follow the pattern of historical colonization drives that are followed by mass emigration and trade between the colonies and the old home soil.¶ What about our own solar system?¶ After contemplating the vastness of interstellar space, our own solar system looks almost comfortingly accessible at first. Exploring our own solar system is a no-brainer: we can do it, we are doing it, and interplanetary exploration is probably going to be seen as one of the great scientific undertakings of the late 20th and early 21st century, when the history books get written.¶ But when we start examining the prospects for interplanetary colonization things turn gloomy again.¶ Bluntly, we're not going to get there by rocket ship.¶ Optimistic projects suggest that it should be possible ... to maintain a Lunar presence for a transportation cost ... to Moon Base One ... [of] not much more than a first-class return air fare from the UK to New Zealand ... except that such a price estimate is hogwash...¶ Whichever way you cut it, sending a single tourist to the moon is going to cost ..., for a mature reusable, cheap, rocket-based lunar transport cycle ... more like $1M. And that's before you factor in the price of bringing them back ...¶ If we want to go panning the (metaphorical) rivers for gold, we'd do better to send teleoperator-controlled robots... There probably are niches for human workers on a moon base, but ... Mission Control would be a lot happier with a pair of hands and a high-def camera that doesn't talk back and doesn't need to go to the toilet or take naps.¶ When we look at the rest of the solar system, the picture is even bleaker. Mars is ... in the same corner as "Gobi desert". As Bruce Sterling has puts it: "I'll believe in people settling Mars at about the same time I see people settling the Gobi Desert. The Gobi Desert is about a thousand times as hospitable as Mars and five hundred times cheaper and easier to reach. Nobody ever writes "Gobi Desert Opera" because, well, it's just kind of plonkingly obvious that there's no good reason to go there and live. It's ugly, it's inhospitable and there's no way to make it pay. Mars is just the same, really. We just romanticize it because it's so hard to reach." In other words, going there to explore is fine and dandy — are robots are all over it already. But as a desirable residential neighbourhood it has some shortcomings, starting with the slight lack of breathable air and the sub-Antarctic nighttime temperatures and the Mach 0.5 dust storms, and working down from there.¶ Actually, there probably is a good reason for sending human explorers to Mars. And that's the distance: at up to 30 minutes, the speed of light delay means that remote control of robots on the Martian surface is extremely tedious. Either we need autonomous roots that can be assigned tasks and carry them out without direct human supervision, or we need astronauts in orbit or on the ground to boss the robot work gangs around.¶ On the other hand, Mars is a good way further away than the moon, and has a deeper gravity well. All of which drive up the cost per kilogram delivered to the Martian surface. Maybe FedEx could cut it as low as $20,000 per kilogram, but I'm not holding my breath.¶ Let me repeat myself: we are not going there with rockets. At least, not the conventional kind...¶ Again, as with interstellar colonization, there are other options. Space elevators, if we build them, will invalidate a lot of what I just said. Some analyses of the energy costs of space elevators suggest that a marginal cost of $350/kilogram to geosynchronous orbit should be achievable without waving any magic wands... And space elevators are attractive because they're a scalable technology... So, long term, space elevators may give us not-unreasonably priced access to space, including jaunts to the lunar surface for a price equivalent to less than $100,000 in today's money. At which point, settlement would begin to look economically feasible, except ...¶ We're human beings. We evolved to flourish in a very specific environment that covers perhaps 10% of our home planet's surface area... Space itself is a very poor environment for humans to live in. ... Cosmic radiation poses a serious risk ..., and unlike solar radiation ... the energies of the particles responsible make shielding astronauts extremely difficult. And finally, there's the travel time. Five and a half years to Jupiter system; six months to Mars.¶ Now, these problems are subject to a variety of approaches — including medical ones: does it matter if cosmic radiation causes ... cancers if we have advanced side-effect-free cancer treatments? Better still, if hydrogen sulphide-induced hibernation turns out to be a practical technique..., we may be able to sleep through the trip. But even so, when you get down to it, there's not really any economically viable activity on the horizon for people to engage in that would require them to settle on a planet or asteroid and live their for the rest of their lives. In general, when we need to extract resources from a hostile environment we tend to build infrastructure to exploit them (such as oil platforms) but we don't exactly scurry to move our families there. Rather, crews go out to work a long shift, then return home to take their leave. After all, there's no there there — just a howling wilderness of north Atlantic gales and frigid water that will kill you within five minutes of exposure. And that, I submit, is the closest metaphor we'll find for interplanetary colonization. Most of the heavy lifting more than a million kilometres from Earth will be done by robots, overseen by human supervisors who will be itching to get home and spend their hardship pay. And closer to home, the commercialization of space will be incremental and slow... [T]he domed city on Mars is going to have to wait for a magic wand or two to do something about the climate, or reinvent a kind of human being who can thrive in an airless, inhospitable environment.¶ Colonize the Gobi desert, colonise the North Atlantic in winter — then get back to me about the rest of the solar system!
6.1. MENSTRUATION AND OVULATION If females are to be part of a human mission to Mars, then the long exposure to microgravity may cause menstrual efflux and retrograde menstruation. Many women commonly experience some retrograde intra-abdominal bleeding during menses which remains confined to the pelvis due to the forces of gravity. However, because of lack of gravity these menstrual blood products may induce retrograde menstruation and menstrual efflux during spaceflight.¶ No symptoms of endometriosis have been as yet detected in female astronauts on the space shuttle (Jennings and Baker, 2008). However, since the longest space shuttle flights are 18 days, and women cycle 28 days, no definite conclusions can be drawn from this finding.¶ Another concern is the effects of radiation. Radiation exposure has caused endometriosis in various species of primate (Fanton and Golden 1991; Wood et al. 1983). Endometriosis ("inside the womb") is caused by hormonal changes and radiation exposure, and is associated with the flourishing of endometrial-like cells outside the uterine cavity and on the ovaries. A common symptom is severe cramping and pain in the lower back, the legs, and the rectal and vaginal area, thereby making it difficult to walk, sit, or have sex (Ballard et al. 2010; Buyalos and Agarwal, 2000). Moreover, the increased number of endometrial-like cells on the ovaries, can cause anatomical distorsions and adhesions which results in infertility (Buyalos and Agarwal, 2000).¶ According to Jennings and Baker (2008), menstruation during space flight lasting up to 18 days has never proved a problem and no symptoms of retrograde menstruation or pain associated with endometriosis have been reported. Unfortunately, although a few women have flown on the International Space Station for periods longer than 100 days (e.g., Sunita Williams, 194 days, Dr. Peggy Whitson, 350 days) privacy concerns have prevented the collection and reporting of data on female menstrual functioning for long duration space missions.¶ The hypothalamus, pituitary, gonadal (HPG) axis regulates the ovulatory cycle, and is highly susceptible to environmental factors including stress (Joseph 1998a, 1999a). Stress can exert adverse effects on the ovaries and can lead to ovulation failure (Tau et al., 2002). Although it appears that short term spaceflight does not affect the ovaries, the effects of a long duration mission are unknown. For example, examination of the ovaries of postpartum rats after 9–20 of gestation showed no effect on ovarian weight or number of preovulatory or atretic follicles (Tau et al., 2002) and female rats ovulated and cycled normally (Serova and Denisova 1982). However, although these females successfully mated with male rats during space flight, no births resulted. Thus, spaceflight might be correlated with negative effects on the capacity to become pregnant and/or on the viability of the fetus while in space.
6.2 MALE TESTOSTERONE, TESTES, AND FERTILITY The ovaries are more radiation resistant than the testes (Suruda 1998), which suggests that males are more likely to become infertile than females following long term radiation exposure, which can be expected in space and on Mars. Perhaps the greater resistance of the female ovum is due to its being approximately 20 times larger than the human sperm cell. The ovum carries the X chromosome, whereas the male sperm may carry either an X or a Y chromosome thus determining if the fetus is male (XY) or female (XX). It is also believed that the male Y chromosome is more fragile than the larger female X chromosome.¶ In contrast to women, men are at a much greater risk to suffer damage to gametes (Jennings and Baker 2008), i.e. sperm, which then puts the smaller Y chromosome at risk. Damage to sperm can result in infertility or effect the sex ratio of offspring. Likewise, alterations and reductions in testosterone levels can effect the sexual orientation, and the sexual anatomy and sexual differentiation of the developing brain leading to feminization (Joseph et al., 1978, 1982). It is noteworthy that jet pilots and astronauts subjected to high G-force exposure have a higher frequency of daughters than those who experienced low G Forces (Little et al. 1987).¶ Male rats mated 5 days after space flight to nonflight female rats bred successfully, but their offspring were grossly abnormal. Abnormalities including physical retardation, showed growth retardation, hemorrhages, hydrocephaly, ectopic kidneys, and enlargement of the bladder (Serova et al., 1982). Male progeny also showed reduced epididymis weight at 30 days of age. By contrast, females mated to male rats 2.5–3 months after short duration spaceflight produced healthy, viable offspring (Santy et al. 1982). Unfortunately, these studies tell us nothing about the effects of long-duration flights.¶ Significant and profound reductions in testosterone levels have been found in both men and male rates following short duration flights (Tau et al., 2002). Reductions in testosterone would effect male sexual functioning and fertility as androgens stimulates sperm production. In most spaceflight studies, reductions in testosterone and the weight of testes has been reported (reviewed by Tau et al., 2002).
Extended spaceflight missions require prolonged exposure to decreased gravity. Human sexual reproduction and fetal development evolved in relation to living on Earth, standing upright, and the influences of Earth gravity (Joseph 200a,b,c). Therefore, it can be predicted normal fetal development (Joseph 2000c), would be effected by reduced gravity (Ma et al., 2008; Ronca 2003).¶ The adverse effects of microgravity on embryos, cell structure and function have been demonstrated by experiments performed in space or in altered gravity induced by clinostats. It is now well established that cellular structure, morphology, and genetic expression may be abnormally effected in microgravity and that the cytoskeleton and microtubules are gravity sensitive and may be grossly altered (Crawford-Young 2006; Ma et al., 2008; Ronca 2003). These gravity induced cellular changes exert a variety of deleterious effects on embryogenesis. These include death of the embryo, failure of neural tube closure, and gross abnormalities in the brain, heart, and limbs.¶ Cells respond to their environment within a three dimensional tissue structure. The number of adhesive structures in a cell and its resulting cell polarity may change the way it will behave in microgravity. For instance cells that are not polarized are more likely to die and undergo apoptosis or develop abnormally as has been demonstrated in microgravity (Crawford-Young 2006).¶ Microgravity has a significant impact on both cell shape and cytoskeleton (Crawford-Young 2006). Cells show signs of changes in the nucleus and in cell shape, and cells which form layers become disorganized, such that the layers do not develop normally. This would include the brain, the outer coating of which consists of 6 layers, and effect the embroyonic neural tube which is also layered and becomes the brain (Joseph 1982, 1999a, 2000c). Embryonic neural tubes do not close properly due to the changes in cell shape, migration, and adhesion, induced by altered gravity (Crawford-Young 2006).¶ Embyronic cells of differing types have different surface tensions and will separate into groups and will sort so that the cells with greater surface tension are on the inside of a tissue and those with less surface tension are on the outside. An example of this is the embryonic and fetal brain and heart (Joseph 1982, 2000c). When the brain develops, cells migrate to the surface area to form six layers consisting of different cell types. The heart also develops as a process of cell migration. If cell migration movements are altered in a developing animal in response to microgravity, the heart and other structures formed by the somites will not develop, causing early embryonic death (Crawford-Young 2006). Thus, any situation where cell mobility or cell lamellipodiae are involved could be affected, such that the fetus and its brain, heart, and internal organs, do not develop normally Hence, there have been no births of mammals in space (Tou et al., 2002; Ronca, 2003).¶ Early embryonic death could also be a direct result of microgravity induced fluid shifts, alterations in cardiovascular functioning, muscle wastage, skeletal demineralization, and decreased red bood cells, all of which would affect the ability to sustain a pregnancy.
"The wars of the future will not be fought on the battlefield or at sea," a military academy commandant voiced by Willem Dafoe intones toward the end of a now-classic 1997 episode of The Simpsons. "They will be fought in space, or possibly on top of a very tall mountain." This was meant as a joke, but the latter half of that statement would soon prove eerily prescient when India and Pakistan battled over Kashmir's Siachen glacier -- a strategically irrelevant ice field sitting over 18,000 feet above sea level -- during the Kargil War in 1999. For now, the prospect of military conflict in outer space still resides in the realm of dystopia or absurdity, to the point that a White House petition demanding the construction of a Star Wars-style "Death Star" could be treated as a harmless prank. In rejecting the petition this week, the White House rightly wondered why a debt-strapped U.S. government would spend $850 quadrillion on a weapons system "with a fundamental flaw that can be exploited by a one-man starship." Thankfully, the prospect of an orbital space-to-earth battlestation doesn't even need to be treated seriously. But it wasn't always this way. In 1952, the eminent rocket scientist Werner Von Braun imagined that a future space station would function as an orbital nuclear platform. Space historians believe that Russia's Salyut 3 space station, which was launched in June of 1974, had a cannon on board, in case a craft or satellite from an enemy country attempted to disrupt its mission. The Soviet Union experimented with Fractional Orbital Bombardment Systems in the 1960s and 70s -- basically nuclear delivery systems that were capable of orbiting the earth. The U.S. even detonated a nuclear weapon over 200 miles above the Pacific Ocean in July of 1962, an incident known as Starfish Prime that, according to Harvard University astrophysicist Jonathan McDowell, halved the useful lifetime of all satellites then in orbit, knocked out power in Hawaii, created an artificial Van Allen Belt that persisted for five years, and released radiation into the atmosphere that wouldn't fully dissipate until the end of the decade. For a time, it was all but taken for granted that space would not only be militarized, but weaponized -- used as a venue or staging area for violent clashes between space-faring nations, or attacks on the surface of the earth. Space war wasn't a punch line, but a possibility that nuclear-armed powers didn't think they could afford to ignore. The results of the Starfish event hint at one reason why that changed. "This is a great weapon. It does a lot of damage -- but it also killed everything you had yourself," McDowell says of the results of the high-altitude nuclear test. War in space was sure to have a cataclysmic effect on the country with the most space assets, regardless of the end result. But what about war from space? For powerful space-faring countries, space-to-earth or earth-to-space combat is about as practical as it is desirable -- which is to say, not very. "Space is incredibly useful for the military for a lot of things," McDowell explains. "It's great for intelligence, communication and navigation. The natural thing is to ask, 'where are my X-Wing fighters?' The fact is that it's hard to find a rationale for them." Laura Grego, a senior scientist in the global security program at the Union of Concerned Scientists, explained why an orbital weapons platform -- the kind of big-ticket military asset that you might want a fleet of X-Wing-type vehicles to protect -- is impractical for attacking targets on earth. "Everything in space is moving at rapid speeds. At the same time, the earth is rotating underneath it....as it's going around, you can't hold [the weapon] above your target. You might be over one country for 15 minutes and then you're gone." This tiny orbital window is called the absentee ratio, and an ICBM, which can hit any target on earth within minutes, isn't constrained by one. McDowell added that in order to reach atmospheric velocity, a rocket needs to reach a breakneck seven kilometers-per-second, far faster than the four to five kilometers-per-second an ICBM must travel. From a purely strategic standpoint, orbiting a weapon for space-to-ground use is more expensive and far less useful than existing, more earth-bound capabilities. Simply orbiting a nuke, while possible, is good for little other than blackmail, or, at best, a Dr. Strangelove or Dead Hand-style insurance policy for a paranoid and heavily-armed space-faring state. The space nuke would be a means of ensuring that someone (or some thing) has the capability of effectively wiping out most or perhaps all of the 1,016 satellites that currently orbit the earth, while rendering their orbits so debris-strewn as to be totally and perhaps permanently useless. Such dangerous and cavalier behavior is the stuff of cinematic super-villainy -- not statecraft. But there's another, more idealistic reason humanity is safe from the scourge of space war. And ironically, it suggests that we might not be safe forever. The ban on Death Star-like orbital weaponry is one of the more robust norms in international law. A prohibition on stationing weapons of mass destruction in space, as well as the total demilitarization of the Moon, is enshrined in article 4 of the Outer Space Treaty of 1967, which 126 countries have signed. As University of Nebraska law professor and space law expert Frans von der Dunk notes, the treaty bans the stationing of weapons of mass destruction in space without banning their actual use in space. The stationing and use of kinetic or conventional weaponry is also allowed. Yet the most worrying aspect of the current legal regime is that the laws of war extend to the heavens as well. "The general international law on the law of force and the prohibition on the use of military force also applies in outer space," says von der Dunk. "If, as part of your self-defense you need your satellite to shoot down the satellite of your aggressor...that is perfectly allowed." Even so, the 1967 treaty demonstrates that in space, the peaceniks seem to be winning, at least for now. Joan Johnson-Freese of the Naval War College explained that there are two ways that, at the most schematic level, there are two ways the international legal regime could conceive of outer space: "On one end you put the view that space is a common heritage of mankind," she says. "The other end of the spectrum is that air, land and sea are all environments, and all those environments have been weaponized and therefore it's inevitable that space too will also become weaponized." The latter formulation raises a number of chilling possibilities: most people probably don't expect a war to break out in space, but the soldiers at Siachen probably didn't expect to be fighting atop an 18,000 mountain pass either. Humanity has proven willing to fight over literally anything, so long as the capability exists. Why should we assume space will be different? Space hasn't been weaponized, and the general anti-weaponization tilt of the 1967 treaty is part of the reason why. That tilt has gained the status of a respected legal norm, one arguably strengthened by the fact that the treaty itself was founded ona bedrock of mutual self-interest. "In the 1960s, the superpowers were able to agree that there was more of a benefit in keeping the other party from doing it than they saw a drawback in themselves being forced to abstain from it," von der Dunk says of the U.S. and Soviet Union's view towards stationing weapons of mass destruction in space. In other words, each side believed that preventing their opponent from weaponizing space was worth the potential strategic cost of foreclosing on their own ability to weaponize space. Even after the Cold War, the norm has endured.
It is a well-known phenomenon that the use of nuclear weapons is considered taboo. Along with the doctrine of mutual assured destruction, the use of nuclear weapons in war is almost unimaginable. The utilitization of nuclear weapons is therefore almost entirely limited to a role of deterrence. What about the taboo of space weapons? More and more specialists are looking at the impact of space debris thatresults from the use of space weapons.10 Large amounts of space debris caused by space weapons will invariably threaten space assets of all space-faring countries, not just intended target countries. Any attack by one country against another using space weapons will result in many losers. With so much of commercial, scientific and military activity increasingly reliant on space, there exists a considerable and growing taboo against using space weapons in a situation of conflict. Thus, under the conditions of American strategic dominance in space, reliable deterrents in space will decrease the possibility of the United States attacking Chinese space assets. At a fundamental level, space weapons – like nuclear weapons – will not alter the essential nature of war. Throughout history, there has been much ink spilled over new weapons that have the unique power and ability to change the underlying quality of war. For example, military theorists once exaggerated the tank’s role in deciding the war’s outcome during World War I.11 The atom bomb itself is probably the most salient example, as many analysts and politicians described the weapon as the unique ultimate weapon.12 But this was a fundamental misunderstanding of war and its implements. Nuclear weapons crossed a threshold in terms of their immense capacity for destruction. But deterrence, mutual assured destruction and the nuclear taboo evolved to consign the use of nuclear weapons to a near impossibility, negating its utility as a tool of war-fighting. Weapons to change the nature of war have not emerged in the past and will not emerge in the future. As such, space weapons will not be the ultimate weapon nor will they be able to decide the outcome of war, even if they are used as a first strike.
Those who believe we run extraordinary risks stemming from clouded perceptions and misunderstandings in an age of computerized space warfare might want to take a look at some real-world situations of high volatility in which potentially provocative actions took place. Take, for example, the tragedies involving the USS Stark and USS Vincennes. In May 1987,an Iraqi F-1 Mirage jet fighter attacked the Stark on patrol to protect neutral shipping in the Persian Gulf, killing 37 sailors. Iraq, a "near-ally" of the United States at the time, had never before attacked a U.S. ship. Analysts concluded that misperception and faulty assumptions led to Iraq’s errant attack. The memory of the USS Stark no doubt preoccupied the crew of the USS Vincennes, which little over a year later, in July 1988, was also on patrol in hostile Persian Gulf waters. The Vincennes crew was involved in a "half war" against Iran, and at the time was fending off surface attacks from small Iranian gunboats. Operating sophisticated technical systems under high stress and rules of engagement that allowed for anticipatory self-defense, the advanced Aegis cruiser fired anti-aircraft missiles at what it believed to be an Iranianmilitary aircraft set on an attack course. The aircraft turned out to be a commercial Iran Air flight, and 290 people perished owing to mistakes in identification and communications. To these examples we may add a long list of tactical blunders growing out of ambiguous circumstances and faulty intelligence, including the U.S. bombing in 1999of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade during Kosovo operations. Yet though these tragic actions occurred in near-war or tinderbox situations, they did not escalate or exacerbate local instability. The world also survived U.S.-Soviet "near encounters" during the 1948 Berlin crisis, the 1961 Cuban missile crisis, and the 1967 and 1973 Arab-Israeli wars. Guarded diplomacy won the day in all cases. Why would disputes affecting space be any different? In other words, it is not at all self-evident that a sudden loss of a communications satellite, for example, would precipitate a wider-scale war or make warfare termination impossible. In the context of U.S.-Russian relations, communications systems to command authorities and forces are redundant. Urgent communications may be routed through land lines or the airwaves. Other means are also available to perform special reconnaissance missions for monitoring a crisis or compliance with an armistice. While improvements are needed, our ability to know what transpires in space is growing — so we are not always in the dark. The burden is on the critics, therefore, to present convincing analogical evidence to support the notion that, in wartime or peacetime, attempts by the United States to control space or exploit orbits for defensive or offensive purposes would increase significantly the chances for crisis instability or nuclear war. In Washington and other capitals, the historical pattern is to use every available means to clarify perceptions and to consider decisions that might lead to war or escalation with care, not dispatch.
Space-Based Defenses: Enormously Expensive, Inherently Ineffective A space-based boost-phase defense is intended to intercept attacking missiles during the first few minutes of their flight, while the missiles’ engines are still burning. To reach attacking missiles during this very short time, SBIs must be stationed in low-altitude orbits. However, in these orbits SBIs move rapidly with respect to the ground and cannot stay over any one location on Earth. To keep at least one interceptor within reach of a given missile launch site at all times therefore requires many SBIs in orbit. A 2003 American Physical Society study showed that many hundreds or thousands of SBIs would be required to provide limited coverage against ballistic missiles launched from areas of concern. This estimate is consistent with the size of the space layer in the Global Protection Against Limited Strikes (GPALS) missile defense system, which was proposed (but not built) by the George H.W. Bush administration in the early 1990s. GPALS called for 1,000 to 5,000 SBIs. Doubling the number of missiles that such a defense could engage would require doubling the size of the entire constellation of SBIs. Moreover, given the technology expected for the next decade, each SBI would weigh up to a ton or more. As a result, deploying such a system would be enormously expensive and actually would exceed U.S. launch capabilities. Additionally, such a system would raise significant issues for crowding and traffic management in space. Yet even if such a large system were built and the technology worked perfectly, it would not provide a reliable defense, for two reasons. First, even if the constellation of hundreds to thousands of interceptors described above were in place, only one or two SBIs would be in position to reach any given launching missile in time to destroy it. Consequently, the defense could be overwhelmed by simultaneously launching multiple missiles from one location. Second, the system could not protect itself from attacks intended to remove interceptors. Because SBIs would be in low-altitude orbits they could easily be detected and trackedfrom the ground; an adversary would know their current and future locations. As a result, any SBI would be vulnerable to attack by inexpensive short- or medium-range missiles. These missiles would burn out at too low an altitude to be intercepted by the SBI, but they could loft homing ASAT weapons at it. By destroying relatively few SBIs in this way, an attacker could create a gap in the defense through which it subsequently could launch its long-range missiles. In short,a defense based on deploying hundreds or thousands of SBIs at enormous cost could be defeated by a handful of enemy missiles.
It should not. Most U.S., European, and Israeli commentators and policymakers warn that a nuclear-armed Iran would be the worst possible outcome of the current standoff. In fact, it would probably be the best possible result: the one most likely to restore stability to the Middle East. POWER BEGS TO BE BALANCED The crisis over Iran's nuclear program could end in three different ways. First, diplomacy coupled with serious sanctions could convince Iran to abandon its pursuit of a nuclear weapon. But this outcome is unlikely: the historical record indicates that a country bent on acquiring nuclear weapons can rarely be dissuaded from doing so. Punishing a state through economic sanctions does not inexorably derail its nuclear program. Take North Korea, which succeeded in building its weapons despite countless rounds of sanctions and UN Security Council resolutions. If Tehran determines that its security depends on possessing nuclear weapons, sanctions are unlikely to change its mind. In fact, adding still more sanctions now could make Iran feel even more vulnerable, giving it still more reason to seek the protection of the ultimate deterrent. The second possible outcome is that Iran stops short of testing a nuclear weapon but develops a breakout capability, the capacity to build and test one quite quickly. Iran would not be the first country to acquire a sophisticated nuclear program without building an actual bomb. Japan, for instance, maintains a vast civilian nuclear infrastructure. Experts believe that it could produce a nuclear weapon on short notice. Such a breakout capability might satisfy the domestic political needs of Iran's rulers by assuring hard-liners that they can enjoy all the benefits of having a bomb (such as greater security) without the downsides (such as international isolation and condemnation). The problem is that a breakout capability might not work as intended. The United States and its European allies are primarily concerned with weaponization, so they might accept a scenario in which Iran stops short of a nuclear weapon. Israel, however, has made it clear that it views a significant Iranian enrichment capacity alone as an unacceptable threat. It is possible, then, that a verifiable commitment from Iran to stop short of a weapon could appease major Western powers but leave the Israelis unsatisfied. Israel would be less intimidated by a virtual nuclear weapon than it would be by an actual one and therefore would likely continue its risky efforts at subverting Iran's nuclear program through sabotage and assassination -- which could lead Iran to conclude that a breakout capability is an insufficient deterrent, after all, and that only weaponization can provide it with the security it seeks. The third possible outcome of the standoff is that Iran continues its current course and publicly goes nuclear by testing a weapon. U.S. and Israeli officials have declared that outcome unacceptable, arguing that a nuclear Iran is a uniquely terrifying prospect, even an existential threat. Such language is typical of major powers, which have historically gotten riled up whenever another country has begun to develop a nuclear weapon of its own. Yet so far, every time another country has managed to shoulder its way into the nuclear club, the other members have always changed tack and decided to live with it. In fact, by reducing imbalances in military power, new nuclear states generally produce more regional and international stability, not less. Israel's regional nuclear monopoly, which has proved remarkably durable for the past four decades, has long fueled instability in the Middle East. In no other region of the world does a lone, unchecked nuclear state exist. It is Israel's nuclear arsenal, not Iran's desire for one, that has contributed most to the current crisis. Power, after all, begs to be balanced. What is surprising about the Israeli case is that it has taken so long for a potential balancer to emerge. Of course, it is easy to understand why Israel wants to remain the sole nuclear power in the region and why it is willing to use force to secure that status. In 1981, Israel bombed Iraq to prevent a challenge to its nuclear monopoly. It did the same to Syria in 2007 and is now considering similar action against Iran. But the very acts that have allowed Israel to maintain its nuclear edge in the short term have prolonged an imbalance that is unsustainable in the long term. Israel's proven ability to strike potential nuclear rivals with impunity has inevitably made its enemies anxious to develop the means to prevent Israel from doing so again. In this way, the current tensions are best viewed not as the early stages of a relatively recent Iranian nuclear crisis but rather as the final stages of a decades-long Middle East nuclear crisis that will end only when a balance of military power is restored. UNFOUNDED FEARS One reason the danger of a nuclear Iran has been grossly exaggerated is that the debate surrounding it has been distorted by misplaced worries and fundamental misunderstandings of how states generally behave in the international system. The first prominent concern, which undergirds many others, is that the Iranian regime is innately irrational. Despite a widespread belief to the contrary, Iranian policy is made not by "mad mullahs" but by perfectly sane ayatollahs who want to survive just like any other leaders. Although Iran's leaders indulge in inflammatory and hateful rhetoric, they show no propensity for self-destruction. It would be a grave error for policymakers in the United States and Israel to assume otherwise. Yet that is precisely what many U.S. and Israeli officials and analysts have done. Portraying Iran as irrational has allowed them to argue that the logic of nuclear deterrence does not apply to the Islamic Republic. If Iran acquired a nuclear weapon, they warn, it would not hesitate to use it in a first strike against Israel, even though doing so would invite massive retaliation and risk destroying everything the Iranian regime holds dear. Although it is impossible to be certain of Iranian intentions, it is far more likely that if Iran desires nuclear weapons, it is for the purpose of providing for its own security, not to improve its offensive capabilities (or destroy itself). Iran may be intransigent at the negotiating table and defiant in the face of sanctions, but it still acts to secure its own preservation. Iran's leaders did not, for example, attempt to close the Strait of Hormuz despite issuing blustery warnings that they might do so after the EU announced its planned oil embargo in January. The Iranian regime clearly concluded that it did not want to provoke what would surely have been a swift and devastating American response to such a move. Nevertheless, even some observers and policymakers who accept that the Iranian regime is rational still worry that a nuclear weapon would embolden it, providing Tehran with a shield that would allow it to act more aggressively and increase its support for terrorism. Some analysts even fear that Iran would directly provide terrorists with nuclear arms. The problem with these concerns is that they contradict the record of every other nuclear weapons state going back to 1945. History shows that when countries acquire the bomb, they feel increasingly vulnerable and become acutely aware that their nuclear weapons make them a potential target in the eyes of major powers. This awareness discourages nuclear states from bold and aggressive action. Maoist China, for example, became much less bellicose after acquiring nuclear weapons in 1964, and India and Pakistan have both become more cautious since going nuclear. There is little reason to believe Iran would break this mold. As for the risk of a handoff to terrorists, no country could transfer nuclear weapons without running a high risk of being found out. U.S. surveillance capabilities would pose a serious obstacle, as would the United States' impressive and growing ability to identify the source of fissile material. Moreover, countries can never entirely control or even predict the behavior of the terrorist groups they sponsor. Once a country such as Iran acquires a nuclear capability, it will have every reason to maintain full control over its arsenal. After all, building a bomb is costly and dangerous. It would make little sense to transfer the product of that investment to parties that cannot be trusted or managed. Another oft-touted worry is that if Iran obtains the bomb, other states in the region will follow suit, leading to a nuclear arms race in the Middle East. But the nuclear age is now almost 70 years old, and so far, fears of proliferation have proved to be unfounded. Properly defined, the term "proliferation" means a rapid and uncontrolled spread. Nothing like that has occurred; in fact, since 1970, there has been a marked slowdown in the emergence of nuclear states. There is no reason to expect that this pattern will change now. Should Iran become the second Middle Eastern nuclear power since 1945, it would hardly signal the start of a landslide. When Israel acquired the bomb in the 1960s, it was at war with many of its neighbors. Its nuclear arms were a much bigger threat to the Arab world than Iran's program is today. If an atomic Israel did not trigger an arms race then, there is no reason a nuclear Iran should now. REST ASSURED In 1991, the historical rivals India and Pakistan signed a treaty agreeing not to target each other's nuclear facilities. They realized that far more worrisome than their adversary's nuclear deterrent was the instability produced by challenges to it. Since then, even in the face of high tensions and risky provocations, the two countries have kept the peace. Israel and Iran would do well to consider this precedent. If Iran goes nuclear, Israel and Iran will deter each other, as nuclear powers always have. There has never been a full-scale war between two nuclear-armed states. Once Iran crosses the nuclear threshold, deterrence will apply, even if the Iranian arsenal is relatively small. No other country in the region will have an incentive to acquire its own nuclear capability, and the current crisis will finally dissipate, leading to a Middle East that is more stable than it is today. For that reason, the United States and its allies need not take such pains to prevent the Iranians from developing a nuclear weapon. Diplomacy between Iran and the major powers should continue, because open lines of communication will make the Western countries feel better able to live with a nuclear Iran. But the current sanctions on Iran can be dropped: they primarily harm ordinary Iranians, with little purpose. Most important, policymakers and citizens in the Arab world, Europe, Israel, and the United States should take comfort from the fact that history has shown that where nuclear capabilities emerge, so, too, does stability. When it comes to nuclear weapons, now as ever, more may be better.
One of the arguments against Iran’s nuclear program is that it will trigger a cascade of proliferation across the Middle East, Prof. Peter Jones with the Ottawa and Stanford Universities writes. He said many hawkish experts, including Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, warned the world of a rapid proliferation across the region, with Saudi Arabia, then Turkey, then Egypt etc inevitably acquiring nuclear weapons. “There is considerable historical evidence to suggest that this would not happen. If it did, it would take a long time,” the pundit argues. So far, only four more nations – India, Pakistan, Israel and North Korea – have acquired nuclear arms. In each case, the reasons why they decided to build nuclear weapons had to do with the specifics of their security situations rather than a reflex action, Prof. Johns stresses. No Arab country built an A-bomb after Israel did. He goes on to point out that the so-called “proliferation narrative” has gripped the majority of analysts and practitioners of international affairs. It is also ample justification for those who wish to attack Iran. “Experience seems to show that most of them [Arab countries] would eventually counter an Iranian bomb by moving even further into the security embrace of the United States – an outcome profoundly at odds with Iran’s interests,” the expert says. So, what is proliferation narrative? It is a scare tactic to justify a war with Iran, he stresses.
Public opinion in the Arab world is largely sympathetic to an Iranian nuclear option, viewing it as a counter to Israel and a way to overcome the perceived double standard of allowing Israel, but not others in the region, to get away with the bomb.55 Turkish public opinion also does not perceive Iran or the nuclear issue in particular as a threat, nor does the current Islamist leadership in Ankara (serious concerns are largely limited to the Turkish military).56 Some regional security elites also expressed some acceptance, and even benefits, of a nuclear Iran, although they are more inclined to recognise the accompanying dangers than the public at large. In Jordan, for example, some strategic analysts suggested that Iran could serve as a balance to Israel and suggested that many in the region view the issue this way.57 A high-level Jordanian official raised the example of South Asia to suggest that the nuclear tests actually had a stabilising regional effect by leading to a renewed peace effort.58 Interestingly, one Israeli analyst also suggested that a bilateral nuclear balance between Israel and Iran – while dangerous in many other ways – could also lead to political agreements by putting more pressure on Israel to deal with Syria and Lebanon.59 In the Gulf, regional tolerance of a nuclear-armed Iran is even more likely, particularly by Oman. Given its long history of economic and cultural interdependence with Iran, Muscat has adopted the most accomodating posture of all the Gulf states. A retired Omani military commander pointed to Iran’s pre- revolutionary support of Oman during the 1970s insurgency in the western Dhofar region, arguing for a degree of continuity in neighbourly relations that would overcome Iran’s belligerent rhetoric or regional fears of a ‘Shia bomb’.60 Why should we be more afraid of a nuclear-armed Iran than a nuclear Pakistan?’ this same official asked. In contrast to fears of an emboldened Iran, he believed that a nuclear-armed Iran would incur increased economic burdens and that its conventional forces would atrophy. A Kuwaiti scholar echoed this prediction of economic decline, arguing that a nuclear-armed Iran, faced with increased isolation and sanctions, warranted increased Kuwaiti investment in anti-smuggling capabilities, to counter the anticipated spike in Iranian black-market activity.61
Unfortunately, while the fear of proliferation is pervasive, it is unfoundedand lacks an understanding of the evidence. Nuclear proliferation has been slow. From 1945 to 1970, only six countries acquired nuclear weapons: United States, Russia, United Kingdom, France, China, and Israel. Since the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty came into effect in 1970, only three countries have joined the nuclear club: India, Pakistan, and North Korea. In total, only .05% of the world’s states have nuclear weapons in their possession. Supporters of non-proliferation seem to overlook the fact that there are states currently capable of making nuclear weapons and have chosen not to construct them, which illustrates the seriousness with which states consider their entrance into the nuclear club. Included on this list are such actors as: Japan, Argentina, Brazil, Egypt, Iran, South Korea, Taiwan, and South Africa. The attraction of nuclear weapons is multifold. Nuclear weapons enhance the international status of states that possess them and help insecure states feel more secure. States also seek nuclear capabilities for offensive purposes. It is important to point out that while nuclear weapons have spread very slowly, conventional weapons have proliferated exponentially across the globe. The wars of the 21st century are being fought in the peripheral regions of the globe that are undergoing conventional weapons proliferation. What the pundits of non-proliferation forget to mention are the many lessons that are learned from the nuclear world. Nuclear weapons provide stability just as they did during the Cold War era. The fear ofMutual Assured Destruction (MAD) loomed heavily on the minds of nuclear powers through out the Cold War and continues to be an important consideration for nuclear states today. States do not strike first unless they are assured of a military victory, and the probability of a military victory is diminished by fear that their actions would prompt a swift retaliation by other states. In other words, states with nuclear weapons are deterred by another state’s second-strike capabilities. During the Cold War, the United States and Soviet Union could not destroy enough of the other’s massive arsenal of nuclear weapons to make a retaliatory strike bearable. Even the prospect of a small number of nuclear weapons being placed in Cuba by the Soviets had a great deterrent effect on the United States. Nothing can be done with nuclear weapons other than to use them for deterrent purposes. If deterrence works reliably, as it has done over the past 60 plus years, then there is less to be feared from nuclear proliferation than there is from convention warfare.
"TODAY, ALMOST any industrialized countrycan produce a nuclear weapon in four to five years," a former chief of Israeli military intelligence recently wrote in The New York Times, echoing a widely held belief. Indeed, the more nuclear technology and know-how havediffused around the world, the more the timeline for building a bomb should have shrunk. But in fact, rather than speeding up over the past four decades, proliferation has gone into slow motion. Seven countries launched dedicated nuclear weapons projects before 1970, and all seven succeeded in relatively short order. By contrast, of the ten countries that have launched dedicated nuclear weapons projects since 1970, only three have achieved a bomb. And only one of the six states that failed -- Iraq -- had made much progress toward its ultimate goal by the time it gave up trying. (The jury is still out on Iran's program.) What is more, even the successful projects of recent decades have neededa long time to achieve their ends. The average timeline to the bomb for successful projects launched before 1970 was about seven years; the average timeline to the bomb for successful projects launched after 1970 has been about 17 years. International security experts have been unable to convincingly explain this remarkable trend. The first and most credible conventional explanation is that the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) has prevented a cascade of new nuclear weapons states by creating a system of export controls, technology safeguards, and on-site inspections of nuclear facilities. The NPT regime has certainly closed off the most straightforward pathways to the bomb. However, the NPT became a formidable obstacle to would-be nuclear states only in the 1990s, when its export-control lists were expanded and Western states finally became serious about enforcing them and when international inspectors started acting less like tourists and more like detectives. Yet the proliferation slowdown started at least 20 years beforethe system was solidified. So the NPT, useful though it may be, cannot alone account for this phenomenon.
Civil nuclear power has not been the cause of or route to nuclear weapons in any country that has nuclear weapons, and no uranium traded for electricity production has ever been diverted for military use. All nuclear weapons programmes have either preceded or risen independently of civil nuclear power*, as shown most recently by North Korea. No country is without plenty of uranium in the small quantities needed for a few weapons. Former US Vice-President Al Gore said (18/9/06) that "During my eight years in the White House, every nuclear weapons proliferation issue we dealt with was connected to a nuclear reactor program. Today, the dangerous weapons programs in both Iran and North Korea are linked to their civilian reactor programs." He is not correct. Iran has failed to convince anyone that its formerly clandestine enrichment program has anything to do with its nuclear power reactor under construction (which is fuelled by Russia), and North Korea has no civil reactor program. In respect to India and Pakistan, which he may have had in mind, there is evidently a link between military and civil, but that is part of the reason they are outside the NPT. Perspective is relevant: As little as five tonnes of natural uranium is required to produce a nuclear weapon. Uranium is ubiquitous, and if cost is no object it could be recovered in such quantities from most granites, or from sea water - sources which would be quite uneconomic for commercial use. In contrast, world trade for electricity production is almost 70,000 tonnes of uranium per year, all of which can be accounted for. There is no chance that the resurgent problem of nuclear weapons proliferation will be solved by turning away from nuclear power or ceasing trade in the tens of thousands of tonnes each year needed for it.
First, nuclear proliferation is not a problem because nuclear weapons have not proliferated. "Proliferation" means to spread like wildfire. We have had nuclear military capability for over fifty years, and we have a total of nine militarily capable nuclear states. That's hardly proliferation; that is, indeed, glacial spread. If another country gets nuclear weapons, and if it does so for good reasons, then that isn't an object of great worry. Every once in a while, some prominent person says something that'sobviously true. Recently, Jacques Chirac [president of France] said that if Iran had one or two nuclear weapons, it would not pose a danger. Well, he was right. Of course, he had to quickly retract it and say, "Oh no, that slipped out, I didn't know the microphone was on!" Second, it doesn't matter who has nuclear weapons. Conversely, the spread of conventional weapons makes a great deal of difference. Forinstance, if a Hitler-type begins to establish conventional superiority, it becomes very difficult to contain and deter him. But, with nuclear weapons, it's been proven without exception that whoever gets nuclear weapons behaves with caution and moderation. Every country--whether they are countries we trust and think of as being highly responsible, like Britain, or countries that we distrust greatly, and for very good reasons, like China during the Cultural Revolution behaves with such caution. It is now fashionable for political scientists to test hypotheses.Well, I have one: If a country has nuclear weapons, it will not be attacked militarily in ways that threaten its manifestly vital interests. That is 100 percent true, without exception, over a period of more than fifty years. Pretty impressive.
The mix of new subjects of U.S. deterrence, such as emerging peer competitors, belligerent rogues, and terror groups, demands new thinking about old assumptions. Chief among these is the rational actor model upon which deterrence theory is predicated. Effective deterrence requires identifying who matters and how to influence them. Before, it was assumed that adversaries would utilize centralized decision-making and exhibit unity of authority, and American assumptions about deterrence rested on the belief that the enemy would have a high-confidence chain of command and would act in “rational” ways that carefully considered cost/benefit calculations. In today’s threat environment, however, it is possible that U.S. capabilities could cause adversaries to disperse their authority in a way that decreases their control of the chain of command, causing the U.S. to lose confidence in its assessments of the relevant actors and their individual goals and objectives. Individuals within a regime might act in ways that are “rational” to them given their culture, worldview, and strategic objectives, but which may not be in keeping with the predictions of the rational actor model. As one panelist argued, an opponent with nothing to lose, such as a North Korean regime on its last legs, might, even without being suicidal, undertake seemingly ill-advised actions with grave consequences. In this new deterrence calculus, adversary intentions are just as important as their capabilities. The more diverse sources and types of threats require the U.S. to think not just about how many nuclear weapons an adversary has in its arsenal, but how a state or group might intend to use its more limited capabilities in ways we hope to prevent. As one panelist argued, rogue states’ interest in nuclear weapons is partly a function of America’s overwhelming conventional superiority. Just as American conventional forces were outmatched in Western Europe during the Cold War, necessitating a strategic shift to reliance on nuclear weapons to deter Soviet conventional aggression in Europe, so too rogues have shifted their focus to nuclear weapons in response to U.S. conventional superiority. This suggests that U.S. nuclear weapons strategies, whatever they may be, play no role in influencing whether rogues are interested in obtaining nuclear weapons of their own. U.S. conventional, not nuclear, forces are the primary threat to rogues, and as long as the U.S. maintains substantial conventional forces, rogue states will continue to view nuclear weapons as the only possible deterrent against U.S. power.
Rebecca Hersman noted that proliferation is a multi-step process, and that this ‘dial-up’ or ‘dial-down’ process is not linear. A national proliferation strategy can therefore take a few or many years. In her view, cascades require that multiple countries match capability to intent at an accelerating rate. She noted that synchronizing capability and intent is very difficult. The concept of “tipping points” is problematic in that it suggests sudden and rapid decisions by multiple countries to cross a singular proliferation boundary. The historical record suggests otherwise – that nuclear decision-making is usually incremental, and could stall or reverse course at many stages. There is little historical evidence to suggest that a rapid expansion in the number of nuclear-armed states is likely in the future, let alone inevitable.
For much of the nuclear age, academic experts, intelligence analysts, and public commentators periodically have forecast rapid bursts of proliferation, which have failed to materialize. Central to their prognoses, often imbued with the imagery and metaphors of nuclear dominoes and proliferation chains, has been the assumption that one state’s nuclearization is likely to trigger decisions by other states to “go nuclear” in quick succession. Today the proliferation metaphors of choice are “nuclear cascade” and “tipping point,” but the implication is the same—we are on the cusp of rapid, large-scale nuclear weapons spread. It is with some justification, therefore, that the study of proliferation has been labeled “the sky-is-still-falling profession.”1 Although proliferation projections abound, few of them are founded on, or even informed by, empirical research and theory.2 This deficiency, though regrettable, is understandable given the small body of theoretically or empirically grounded research on forecasting proliferation developments, and the underdeveloped state of theory on nonproliferation and nuclear decisionmaking more generally. Also contributing to this knowledge deficit is the stunted development of social science research on foreign policy–oriented forecasting and the emphasis on post hoc explanations, rather than predictions on the part of the more sophisticated frameworks and models of nuclear decisionmaking.
In our traditional mentality, the determination to denuclearize the DPRK quite explicitly assumes that nuclear weapons are evil; as Scott Sagan (2003, p. 49) puts it, “Nuclear weapons have been given a bad name.” This negative perception of nuclear weapons is built upon the basis of the huge devastation that would result in the world if a nuclear war, of whatever scale, broke out. Coupled with the peculiar nature of the DPRK's autocratic regime, a nuclear-armed DPRK is then perceived as too hostile and destructive to its neighbours. However, applying the analogy of “more may be better”, an alternative discourse with respect to nuclear proliferation maintained by Waltz could well pinpoint a far more optimistic scenario. Contrary to conventional wisdom, Waltz asserts that nuclear proliferation not only reduces the possibility of going to war, but also encourages new nuclear states, which used to rule in a radical manner domestically, to behave in an increasingly rational manner diplomatically. At the extreme, Waltz suggests that nuclear proliferation may maintain peace rather than threaten global security. Surprisingly, the application of his theory to the DPRK is rather limited; and is confined only to media reports (Swami, 2010). In his classic study Waltz (1995) proposes five fundamental assumptions to illustrate his argument. First, he argues that the international system is anarchical, i.e., no global authority protects security, provides public goods or controls domestic affairs above the state level. As a result, states have to ensure their own security by preventing attack from other states themselves. In other words, the anarchical system drives states to self-help. The absence of a world government then prompts individual states to gain access to weapons to compensate for a sense of insecurity. Acquisition of nuclear weapons and inducement of an arms race between states show the self-help system at work. Second, as “states coexist in a condition of anarchy”, they try hard to advance the sophistication of weapons and enhance military capability as much as possible to avoid aggression from adversaries (Waltz, 1995, p. 4). This self-strengthening process is what Waltz calls “security maximization”. What do states do with their weapons throughout this process? Waltz thinks that states mainly possess the weapons for a defensive purpose. When a state enhances its military capability (the relevant gain), its neighbouring states immediately face relevant loss to the military equilibrium. In consequence, the latter have to strengthen their military power in response to the relevant loss in order to maintain a balance of power. Waltz (1995, p. 5) explains the defensive intention of security maximization as follows: One way to counter an intended attack is to build fortifications and to muster forces that look forbiddingly strong. To build defenses so patently strong that no one will try to destroy or overcome them would make international life perfectly tranquil, I call this the defensive ideal. However, this statement does not imply that these states will not use weapons to attack others. In the event that a state perceives gains from aggression to outweigh the cost of war, battle might break out. Waltz argues that this scenario is unlikely to happen between nuclear powers. Since Waltz, different schools deriving from neo-realism have offered different assumptions on the likeliness of conflicts owing to different assessments of uncertainty and risk, such as offensive realism or defensive realism. Some might put the defensive rationale by indicating that states tend to keep the nuclear weapons as an “existential deterrent” so as to deter others from military actions (Naval Studies Board & US Research Council, 1997). Third, Waltz (1995, pp. 7, 9) maintains that nuclear weapons, unlike conventional weapons, give “an easy clarity” for states to predict the action of other states and thereby “makes war less likely”. This is because all states realize that nuclear weapons have the potential to cause unlimited and devastating suffering. At the extreme, the concept of mutual assured destruction (MAD) sends a very clear message to both sides should two nuclear powers go to war. In contrast, as the suffering from conventional weapons can be to some extent contained, states might deem the cost of such war affordable and recklessly wage war and suffer the results of miscalculation. Waltz (1995, p. 9) defines the fundamental essence of nuclear weapons thus: In a nuclear world, prediction is easy to make because it does not require close estimates of opposing forces. … In a conventional world, deterrent threats are ineffective because the damage threatened is distant, limited, and problematic. Fourth, Waltz (1995, p. 7) assumes state actors are rational and are able to predict scenarios as well as calculate their self-interests, so that states will not take the risk of going to war when they predict the battle could only “win much and might lose everything”. Waltz offers the case of the Cuban Missile Crisis to illustrate this point. As nuclear weapons can wreak unlimited damage to states, the strategy of MAD further makes states cautious. This deterrent effect in a nuclear world consequently avoids any miscalculation of gains and losses. Regardless of the regime type, historical context and the political spectrum, nuclear weapons and nuclear wars constantly imply a massive relevant loss to states, thus preventing them from going to war. Even if the historical context might determine a nuclear pair, such as the US and the Soviet Union, China and the Soviet Union, India and Pakistan, many realists argues that rational calculation is more fundamental than bitterness (Rajain, 2005). As Waltz (1995, p. 12) puts it: “Those who believe that bitterness causes wars assume a close association that is seldom found between bitterness among nations and their willingness to run high risks.” In short, states will not go to nuclear war as they are rational actors in international relations. Fifth, when calculation of the prospects makes nuclear states reluctant to go to war, Waltz suggests horizontal nuclear proliferation is encouraged in world politics while vertical proliferation is made redundant. “Vertical proliferation” of nuclear weapons, according to Waltz, was demonstrated during the Cold War, especially between the US and the Soviet Union, when the number of nuclear warheads and their technological quality rapidly increased. Waltz (1995, p. 7) argues that further vertical proliferation is unnecessary since only a few nuclear weapons and a “second strike” capability may be a sufficient deterrent to other would-be attackers. Rather, “horizontal proliferation”, which means the spread of nuclear weapons to different countries, is seen by Waltz as more crucial in preserving peace in the world. When more states possess nuclear weapons, calculations about using them become complicated (Waltz, 1995, p. 15). States will thus be reluctant to take the risk of starting a nuclear war because of the uncertainty of the response from other states and the certainty of unlimited nuclear destruction to both sides should a nuclear response be elicited. This helps exclude the option of using nuclear weapons for the mere purpose of interest maximization.
The geopolitical context in Latin America provides another reason the U.S. government should make a serious shift on Cuba. For five years now, Obama has ignored Latin America's unanimous disapproval of Washington's position on Cuba. Rather than perpetuate Havana's diplomatic isolation, U.S. policy embodies the imperial pretensions of a bygone era, contributing to Washington's own marginalization. Virtually all countries in the region have refused to attend another Summit of the Americas meeting if Cuba is not at the table. Cuba, in turn, currently chairs the new Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, which excludes Washington. The Obama administration has begun laying out what could become a serious second-term agenda for Latin America focused on energy, jobs, social inclusion, and deepening integration in the Americas. But the symbolism of Cuba across the region is such that the White House can definitively lead U.S. -- Latin American relations out of the Cold War and into the twenty-first century only by shifting its Cuba policy. To make such a shift, however, Washington must move past its assumption that Havana prefers an adversarial relationship with the United States. Raúl Castro has shown that he is not his brother and has availed himself of numerous channels, public and private, to communicate to Washington that he is ready to talk. This does not mean that he or his successors are prepared to compromise on Cuba's internal politics; indeed, what Castro is willing to put on the table remains unclear. But his government's decisions to release more than 120 political prisoners in 2010 and 2011 and allow a number of dissident bloggers and activists to travel abroad this year were presumably meant to help set the stage for potential talks with the United States. Meanwhile, the death of Hugo Chávez, the former Venezuelan president, and the narrow margin in the election of his successor, Nicolás Maduro, have made it clear that Havana has reasons of its own to chart a path forward with the United States. In the last decade or so, Cuba came to depend on Venezuela for large supplies of subsidized oil, in exchange for a sizable brigade of Cuban doctors staffing the Chávez government's social programs. Political uncertainty in Caracas offers a potent reminder of the hazards of relying too heavily on any one partner. Havana is already beginning to branch out. In addition to financing the refurbishing of Mariel Harbor, the Brazilians have extended a line of credit to renovate and expand five airports across the island and have recently signed a deal to hire 6,000 Cuban doctors to fill shortages in Brazil's rural health coverage. Even so, in the long run, the United States remains a vital natural market for Cuban products and services. Of course, as the 1990s proved, even a huge financial setback may not be enough to drive Havana to Washington's door. Half a century of U.S. economic warfare has conditioned Cuban bureaucrats and party cadres to link openness at home or toward the United States with a threat to Cuba's independence. Some hard-liners might prefer muddling through with the status quo to the uncertainty that could come from a wider opening of their country. The best way to change such attitudes, however, would be for Washington to take the initiative in establishing a new diplomatic and economic modus vivendi with Havana. In the short term, the two countries have numerous practical problems to solve together, including environmental and security challenges, as well as the fate of high-profile nationals serving time in U.S. and Cuban prisons. Most of the policy-steps Obama should take at this stage -- removing Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism, eliminating obstacles for all Americans to travel there, and licensing greater trade and investment -- would not require congressional approval or any grand bargain with Havana. Although it might be politically awkward in the United States for a president to be seen as helping Castro, on the island, such measures would strengthen the case that Cuba can stand to become a more open, democratic society without succumbing to external pressure or subversion. Deeper commercial ties, moreover, could have repercussions beyond the economic realm, giving internal reformers more leeway and increasing support on the island for greater economic and political liberalization. In 1991, Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev stood beside U.S. Secretary of State James Baker in Moscow and announced that the Soviet Union would eliminate its multibillion-dollar annual subsidy to Cuba. CIA analysts and American pundits immediately began predicting the imminent demise of the Cuban Revolution and a quick capitalist restoration. More than 20 years have passed since then, Fidel Castro has retired, and 82-year-old Raul Castro is now serving the first year of what he has said will be his final five-year term as president. In 2018, when Díaz-Canel takes the reins, Cuba in all likelihood will continue to defy post-Cold War American fantasies even as it moves further away from its orthodox socialist past. For the remaining members of Cuba's founding revolutionary generation, such a delicate transformation provides a last opportunity to shape their legacy. For Cubans born after 1991, the coming years may offer a chance to begin leaving behind the state of prolonged ideological and economic limbo in which they were raised. Obama, meanwhile, has a choice. He can opt for the path of least political resistance and allow the well-entrenched bureaucrats, national security ideologues, and pro-embargo voices in his own country to keep Cuba policy in a box, further alienating regional allies and perpetuating the siege mentality among Cuban officials. Or he can dare to be the president who finally extracts the United States from Cuba's internal debate and finds a way for Washington and Havana to work together. Both the Cuban people and U.S. national interests would benefit as a result.
The U.S. government is fighting an effort to allow Cuba to return to the Organization of American States after a 47-year suspension. But the resistance is putting it at odds with much of Latin America as the Obama administration is trying to improve relations in the hemisphere.¶ Eliminating the Cold War-era ban would be largely symbolic, because Cuba has shown no sign of wanting to return to the OAS, the main forum for political cooperation in the hemisphere. But the debate shows how central the topic has become in U.S. relations with an increasingly assertive Latin America. The wrangling over Cuba threatens to dominate a meeting of hemispheric foreign ministers, including Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, scheduled for Tuesday in Honduras.¶ "Fifty years after the U.S. . . . made Cuba its litmus test for its commercial and diplomatic ties in Latin America, Latin America is turning the tables," said Julia E. Sweig, a Cuba scholar at the Council on Foreign Relations. Now, she said, Latin countries are "making Cuba the litmus test for the quality of the Obama administration's approach to Latin America."¶ President Obama has taken steps toward improving ties with Cuba, lifting restrictions on visits and money transfers by Cuban Americans and offering to restart immigration talks suspended in 2004. But he has said he will not scrap the longtime economic embargo until Havana makes democratic reforms and cleans up its human rights record. Ending the embargo would also entail congressional action.¶ Obama is facing pressure to move faster, both from Latin American allies and from key U.S. lawmakers. Bipartisan bills are pending in Congress that would eliminate all travel restrictions and ease the embargo.¶ Cuba has sent mixed signals about its willingness to respond to the U.S. gestures.¶ Latin American leaders say that isolating Cuba is anachronistic when most countries in the region have established relations with communist nations such as China. The OAS secretary general, JosÃ© Miguel Insulza, has called the organization's 1962 suspension of Cuba "outdated" -- noting it is based on the island's alignment with a "communist bloc" that no longer exists. However, he has suggested that OAS members could postpone Cuba's full participation until it showed democratic reforms.¶ Cuban exile organizations and some U.S. lawmakers are strongly opposed to readmitting the island.¶ "If we invite Cuba back in, in spite of their violations, what message are we sending to the rest of the hemisphere -- that it's okay to move backwards away from democracy and human rights, that there will be no repercussions for such actions?" Sen. Robert Menendez (D-N.J.), a Cuban American, demanded in a speech. He threatened to cut off U.S. funding for the OAS -- about 60 percent of its budget -- if the measure passed.¶ Clinton said last week that Cuba should be readmitted only if it abided by the OAS's Democratic Charter, a set of principles adopted in 2001 that commits countries to hold elections and to respect human rights and press freedoms.¶ Most Latin American countries broke relations with Cuba after its 1959 revolution. Nearly all have restored diplomatic ties, and the United States will soon be the only holdout in the hemisphere.¶ The Cuba ban could be lifted by a two-thirds vote of the OAS foreign ministers on Tuesday. However, the organization generally works by consensus, and several countries have indicated they do not want a showdown with the United States.¶ Diplomats have been trying in recent days to hammer out a compromise. U.S. diplomats introduced a resolution that would instruct the OAS to open a dialogue with Cuba about its "eventual reintegration," consistent with the principles of "democracy and full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms."¶ A diplomat said last night that the United States appears to be softening its opposition to lifting the ban as long as Cuba's full reinstatement is contingent on moving toward democracy. He spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the talks.¶ Venezuela, an ally of Cuba, has indicated it will not support any resolution that includes such conditions. "This is 'Jurassic Park,' " fumed Venezuelan Ambassador Roy Chaderton. "We're still in the Cold War."¶ Some Latin American diplomats worry that the Cuba imbroglio could further marginalize the OAS. The organization is respected for monitoring elections, and it has tried to broker disputes in the hemisphere. But critics lambaste it as largely a debating society.¶ Venezuela has threatened to quit the organization and form an alternative regional group. It has set up a leftist trade alliance known as ALBA with several poor countries in Latin America. Cuba has derided the OAS as a U.S.-dominated tool of the United States.¶ Peter Hakim, president of the Inter-American Dialogue, a think tank in Washington, said the Cuba resolution has trapped the Obama administration between two of its priorities: democracy promotion and better relations with its neighbors. In 2001, the U.S. government supported the Democratic Charter, a milestone in a region once known for dictatorships. But Obama told hemispheric leaders in Trinidad and Tobago last month that he wanted to form closer partnerships and not have the United States dictate policy.¶ "There's really two different values at play here: multilateralism versus democracy. You can't have multilateralism and then let one country, i.e. the U.S., make the decision for a multilateral organization," Hakim said.
Recently, tensions over maritime disputes in the South China Sea seem to have surpassed even those caused by the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands. China and Vietnam are embroiled in their worst political conflict in decades over an oil drilling platform near the Paracel Islands. The resulting anti-China protests in Vietnam brought China-Vietnam relations to a temporary halt. In addition, the Philippines’ detention of Chinese fishermen has increased the discord between China and the Philippines. With all these frictions occurring at the same time, the situation in the South China Sea has suddenly become very serious. Against this background, we have seen the U.S. criticize China, express support for Vietnam, and shield the Philippine military. But we have not heard Russia, China’s “strategic partner,” take a stand on the South China Sea disputes, much less publicly support China’s position. This has upset some people in China, who now think that China-Russia relations aren’t as good as previously imagined. Even on the Senkaku/Diaoyu dispute between China and Japan, Russia has kept an ambiguous position. In my eyes, however, this does not mean that Russia’s is of two minds in its relationship with China. Instead, there are complicated political and strategic factors, including four main reasons I will list below. First, the China-Russia relationship is different from U.S.-Philippines relations. China and Russia are not allies. There is no alliance treaty between them, while there are security treaties between the U.S. and the Philippines as well as between the U.S. and Japan. In an alliance relationship, each side has treaty obligations to provide political and even military support to its partner. In international relations, this is the highest-level type of bilateral relationship. While the China-Russia relationship has some characteristics of a comprehensive strategic partnership, the two parties are not bound by treaty obligations to strive for each other’s international space and national interests. For a long time, China’s state media has been emphasizing and promoting the positive factors in China-Russia relations, while overseas media also often over-praise this relationship. Sometimes media outlets even posit that China and Russia are “allies” without an alliance treaty. This has led many people to believe that China-Russia political cooperation is boundless, causing a great improvement to China’s security situation. But the facts of international relations tell us that no matter how good the China-Russia relationship is, it won’t influence China’s basic policy in the South and East China Seas. The fact is that China-Russia relations are fundamentally based on mutual interests. The South China Sea is not a place where Russia can expand its interests, nor is it necessary for Russia to interfere in this region absent a formal alliance with China. Chinese people cannot misinterpret the character of China-Russia relations and expect too much from Russia. Second, Russia enjoys good relations with countries bordering the South China Sea and does not need to offend Southeast Asia for the sake of China. As noted above, Russia is not enthusiastic about publicly backing China on the South China Sea issue. One of the most important reasons for this is that Russia enjoys good relations with many of the Southeast Asian countries. For example, Russia’s predecessor, the Soviet Union, was historically even closer to Vietnam than it was to China. Because of the USSR’s strong support, Vietnam was able to fight off the United States. Afterward, Vietnam began to undertake anti-China activities, again with Soviet backing. After the collapse of the USSR, Russia inherited this extraordinary friendship. There are no major obstacles to the development of the Russia-Vietnam relationship — there are no serious disputes or conflicts on either the historical or the practical level. And there is one particular area of cooperation between the two countries: defense, where cooperation has stretched from World War II to today. Many of Vietnam’s weapons come from Russia, such as the Kilo-class diesel submarines fueling the growth of Vietnam’s navy. In addition, in the second half of 2014 Russia will deliver four Su-30MK2 fighters to Vietnam, which could potentially become weapons in a future China-Vietnam confrontation. Russia also enjoys a good relationship with the Philippines. For example, two years ago, three Russian navy vessels (including the anti-submarine destroyer Admiral Panteleyev) arrived in Manila for a three-day port visit. According to Russia, this visit helped improve Russia-Philippine ties. Third, it’s unnecessary for Russia to seek out a direct confrontation with the U.S. over the South China Sea. Currently Russia’s focus is on Europe, especially the Ukraine crisis that has already solidified the confrontation between Russia and the West. Such a problem will be difficult to solve in the short term. Given this, Russia has neither the desire nor the ability to confront the U.S. in the South China Sea. Besides, the South China Sea disputes are not really conflicts between China and the United States. The disputes stem from disagreements between the South China Sea border countries about the history and the status quo of maritime rights. The U.S. is only an influencing factor, not a determining factor that will determine the future of the situation. In this context, as an outsider and bystander, Russia has even less of a motivation to support China and criticize the U.S. Fourth, the development of China has actually caused some worries within Russia. To some people in the West, the discord between China and other South China Sea countries could help restrict China’s “expansion” into other regions. In Russia, there has always been some concern that China’s development will lead to the Russian far east being gradually “occupied” by the Chinese, with this vast territory, along with its resources, becoming fodder for China’s development. Although Russian officials are optimistic about the potential for cooperation in the far east, they have never for a moment relaxed their guard against China’s so-called “territorial expansion.”
In the six days since Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was brought down by a missile over eastern Ukraine, amid intensifying suspicions of Russian involvement, the European Union has struggled to reconcile its desire to sanction Russia with its reliance on the country’s energy resources. But for Russia, dealing with U.S. and EU sanctions since earlier this year over the Ukraine crisis, the inverse dilemma is no less vexing: How to wean its economy off its dependence on European imports. Once endowed with a complex economy that exported manufactured goods, Russia is now an energy state: Today, oil and natural gas account for two-thirds of its exports and 80 percent of its foreign exchange earnings. No other major economy in the world -- Russia’s currently ranks ninth by GDP -- depends so much on oil and gas prices for its health. Europe is by far Russia’s largest customer. The continent imported 170 billion of Russia’s 195 billion cubic meters of natural gas in 2013, and several countries -- including Russia's neighbors and former subjects Finland, Estonia and Latvia -- get their natural gas from no one else. But despite this leverage, strained relations with Europe have inflicted significant damage on Russia’s economy. GDP grew by only 0.5 percent in the first quarter of 2014, while unemployment rose above 5 percent. Lately, things have only grown worse. Since July 17, the day of the MH17 disaster (and one day after the U.S. announced its own increased sanctions), the Micex, Russia’s main stock exchange index, has fallen by 7 percent. Russia has suffered some $70 billion in capital flight so far in 2014, while low investment -- exacerbated by high interest rates -- might push the country into recession before the end of the year. Given these solutions, it’s only natural that Russia has looked elsewhere for a lifeline: the East. Russia and China have grown chummy in recent years, as the two have found common cause in thwarting Washington’s geopolitical ambitions on the United Nations Security Council. More recently, Russia and China have stepped up their economic cooperation. In May, following a decade of negotiations, the two countries finalized a pipeline deal which, upon its completion in 2018, will send 38 billion cubic meters of Russian gas to China. That wasn’t all: Rosneft, one of Russia’s major energy companies, will also supply China National Petroleum Corporation with 365 million tons of oil over the next 25 years. Reluctant to focus only on China, Moscow has also cemented deals with Beijing’s regional adversary Japan, which imports 8 percent of its gas from Russia -- an amount likely to increase as a result of Tokyo’s post-Fukushima abandonment of nuclear energy. Moscow is also negotiating with New Delhi over a $30 billion pipeline that will export oil to India’s rapidly growing population. But before Russia’s so-called “pivot to Asia” transforms the country’s trade profile, Europe remains entrenched as Russia’s dominant economic partner. Only 6 percent of China’s oil imports currently come from Russia, far less than the amount from distant Saudi Arabia and Angola. For Beijing, Moscow is one of several key energy partners, hardly the only game in town. And alongside the much-heralded gas pipeline with Russia, Beijing has inked a pipeline deal with energy-rich Turkmenistan that will, upon completion, discharge 55 billion cubic meters of gas to China. Russia’s relatively light footprint in Asia represents a historical norm: Russia’s wealth and population are still concentrated in its European end, and the country, for historical as well as logistical reasons, still sees Europe as its primary economic sphere of influence. According to Dmitry Gorenburg, a Russia expert at CNA, Russia’s energy ties with China are best thought of as a temporary marriage of convenience rather than a long-term strategic pivot. “If down the road there’s a de-escalation in the current crisis with Ukraine, and Europe lifts or partially lifts sanctions, the tendency in Moscow would be to refocus on Europe,” Gorenburg said. “The ideal for Russia is for China to be an additional customer in pipeline deals, not a substitute for Europe,” says Gorenburg. “The one thing we have to remember is that China, as close as they’ve gotten with Russia on energy, their economic cooperation and trade with the U.S. and the EU is always far more important than whatever they’ve got going on with Russia,” Gorenburg said.
Moscow and Beijing characterize their relationship as a comprehensive strategic partnership, but their cooperation is mostly tactical. The two countries approach the world from quite different vantage points. China is a rising power, with a fast-growing, export-driven economy eager to benefit from globalization. Russia is a stagnating petro-state seeking to insulate itself from the forces of change. Moscow touts its partnership with Beijing mostly to prove to the rest of the world that Russia still matters, while China views it as a low-cost way of placating Russia. Lacking much of a common agenda, cooperation is limited to areas where their interests already overlap, like bolstering trade. In the parts of the world that matter most to them, Russia and China are more rivals than allies. Take Southeast Asia. Beijing’s assertive claims to maritime boundaries in the South China Sea have rattled America’s regional partners and led Washington to deepen its security cooperation with Vietnam, the Philippines and other states whose territorial claims China disputes. But to Beijing’s frustration, Moscow has remained silent on the territorial disputes, even as Russian energy companies have signed deals with Vietnam to develop oil and gas resources in the South China Sea — in waters claimed by China. Meanwhile, Russia’s defense industry is expanding its weapons sales throughout Southeast Asia, including selling advanced attack submarines to the Vietnamese Navy. In Central Asia, Chinese economic power is rapidly pushing Russia aside. Chinese capital is paying for new roads, railroads and pipelines that lock the Central Asian states ever tighter into the Chinese embrace. Last year, all the Central Asian nations save Uzbekistan traded more with China than with Russia. Thanks to the opening of a gas pipeline from Central Asia to China in late 2009, Beijing has been able to take a hard line with Moscow on negotiations to build a new Russia-China pipeline. Russia’s push to bring Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan into its customs union with Belarus and Kazakhstan, along with Vladimir Putin’s call to establish an Eurasian Union by 2015, are based heavily on a desire to limit the reorientation of the Central Asian states’ economies toward China. Nor does sporadic cooperation between the Russian and Chinese militaries alter the fact that China’s assertiveness worries Russia at least as much as it worries the United States. Russian military commanders acknowledge that they see China as a potential foe, even as official statements continue to focus on the alleged threat from the United States and NATO. In July 2010, Russia conducted one of its largest ever military exercises, which aimed at defending the sparsely populated Russian Far East from an unnamed opponent with characteristics much like those of the People’s Liberation Army.
In February 2012, during a Washington, D.C., visit, then Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping raised the prospect of “a new type of relationship between major countries in the 21st century.”1 As State Councilor Dai Bingguo said about the concept, “China and the U.S. must create the possibility that countries with different political institutions, cultural traditions and different economic systems can respect and cooperate with each other.”2
Recent events have raised serious doubts about both elements of this strategy. Decades of trade and talk have not hastened China's political liberalization. Indeed, the last few years have been marked by an intensified crackdown on domestic dissent. At the same time, the much-touted economic relationship between the two Pacific powers has become a major source of friction. And despite hopes for enhanced cooperation, Beijing has actually done very little to help Washington solve pressing international problems, such as North Korea's acquisition of nuclear weapons or Iran's attempts to develop them. Finally, far from accepting the status quo, China's leaders have become more forceful in attempting to control the waters and resources off their country's coasts. As for balancing, the continued buildup of China's military capabilities, coupled with impending cuts in U.S. defense spending, suggests that the regional distribution of power is set to shift sharply in Beijing's favor. WHY WE CAN'T ALL JUST GET ALONG Today, China's ruling elites are both arrogant and insecure. In their view, continued rule by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is essential to China's stability, prosperity, and prestige; it is also, not coincidentally, vital to their own safety and comfort. Although they have largely accepted some form of capitalism in the economic sphere, they remain committed to preserving their hold on political power. The CCP'S determination to maintain control informs the regime's threat perceptions, goals, and policies. Anxious about their legitimacy, China's rulers are eager to portray themselves as defenders of the national honor. Although they believe China is on track to become a world power on par with the United States, they remain deeply fearful of encirclement and ideological subversion. And despite Washington's attempts to reassure them of its benign intentions, Chinese leaders are convinced that the United States aims to block China's rise and, ultimately, undermine its one-party system of government. Like the United States, since the end of the Cold War, China has pursued an essentially constant approach toward its greatest external challenger. For the most part, Beijing has sought to avoid outright confrontation with the United States while pursuing economic growth and building up all the elements of its "comprehensive national power," a Chinese strategic concept that encompasses military strength, technological prowess, and diplomatic influence. Even as they remain on the defensive, however, Chinese officials have not been content to remain passive. They have sought incremental advances, slowly expanding China's sphere of influence and strengthening its position in Asia while working quietly to erode that of the United States. Although they are careful never to say so directly, they seek to have China displace the United States in the long run and to restore China to what they regard as its rightful place as the preponderant regional power. Chinese strategists do not believe that they can achieve this objective quickly or through a frontal assault. Instead, they seek to reassure their neighbors, relying on the attractive force of China's massive economy to counter nascent balancing efforts against it. Following the advice of the ancient military strategist Sun-tzu, Beijing aims to "win without fighting," gradually creating a situation in which overt resistance to its wishes will appear futile. The failure to date to achieve a genuine entente between the United States and China is the result not of a lack of effort but of a fundamental divergence of interests. Although limited cooperation on specific issues might be possible, the ideological gap between the two nations is simply too great, and the level of trust between them too low, to permit a stable modus vivendi. What China's current leaders ultimately want -- regional hegemony -- is not something their counterparts in Washington are willing to give. That would run counter to an axiomatic goal of U.S. grand strategy, which has remained constant for decades: to prevent the domination of either end of the Eurasian landmass by one or more potentially hostile powers. The reasons for this goal involve a mix of strategic, economic, and ideological considerations that will continue to be valid into the foreseeable future.
First, the U.S. and China need to start actively cooperating together on global challenges where we have mutual interests. In the past, our countries have focused on bilateral issues. Today, however, the major challenges and opportunities for the U.S.-China relationship will come in working together to address critical global challenges such as nuclear proliferation, energy and food security, terrorism, climate change, Middle East instability, cyber security, and global financial reform and recovery.¶ The need to find tangible ways to work together constructively on global challenges was evident at Sunnylands. Obama and Xi concluded their discussions with an announcement to enhance cooperation on combating nuclear proliferation by continuing to apply pressure on Pyongyang, and to work together to combat climate change by discussing ways to reduce emissions of hydrofluorocarbons. If we can engage in more effort together that produce real benefits for our peoples as well as the rest of the world, this will be an important step toward making the new model of major country relations a reality.¶ Second, Chinese and American leaders will need to resist the expectation that either side will change the other side’s views on long-standing and historical areas of disagreement between our two countries—such as Taiwan or human rights— overnight. Many in Washington are concerned that the new model of great power relations concept is an effort by China to compel the U.S. to respect China’s core interests, create Chinese spheres of influence, and get the U.S. to accommodate China's interests on Beijing’s terms. This type of approach will not work, and making this a starting point for discussions on the new paradigm will only set this exercise up for failure. On many of these issues, including Taiwan, the United States and China have agreed to disagree since their first communiqué in 1972. But in a more positive context of greater cooperation on global issues, our leaders will be in a better place to work on and reduce these areas of long-standing disagreement. ¶ Third, our countries have new areas of tensions in the relationship that exacerbate mistrust and that we need to address with urgency. In 2013, these issues included revelations of Chinese cyber hacking of American commercial and military secrets to dangerous risks deriving from regional territorial disputes in the South and East China Sea, including Beijing’s recent announcement of a new Air Defense Identification Zone. These challenges, especially the latter, hold the potential for confrontation between our militaries if we do not renew our military to military efforts to increase transparency and cooperation. These important issues must be addressed head-on, not sidestepped. But as we work vigorously through these current disagreements, we should not allow these areas of friction to define or overwhelm our broad and robust relationship. But we must address them with urgency and find ways to reduce these disagreements and enhance trust if we are to achieve a new type of major country relations.
The U.S. Congress and successive U.S. administrations have supported the EU project since its inception as a way to foster a stable Europe, democratic states, and strong trading partners. The United States has welcomed EU efforts since the end of the Cold War to expand the political and economic benefits of membership to central and eastern Europe, and supports the EU aspirations of Turkey and the western Balkan states. The United States and the EU share a huge and mutually beneficial economic relationship. Two-way flows of goods, services, and foreign investment now exceed $1.0 trillion on an annual basis, and the total stock of two-way direct investment is over $1.9 trillion. Nevertheless, the U.S.-EU relationship has been challenged in recent years as numerous trade and foreign policy conflicts have emerged. The 2003 crisis over Iraq, which bitterly divided the EU and severely strained U.S.-EU relations, is most notable, but the list of disagreements has been wide and varied. Although Europeans are not monolithic in their views, many EU member states have objected to at least some elements of U.S. policy on issues ranging from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to U.S. treatment of terrorist detainees to climate change and aircraft subsidies. Since 2003, however, both sides have made efforts to improve relations, and successive U.S.-EU summits have sought to emphasize areas of cooperation and partnership. At the same time, challenges and some tensions remain in the U.S.-EU relationship.
As the trade relations between the EU and the US are governed in a large part by the GATT and the WTO, both actors defend free-trade principles, but they often accuse each other for pursuing protectionist policies such as imposing tariffs, quotas and other direct barriers to trade typically imposed at EU or US borders or giving unfair advantages to its own exporters through state subsidies or safeguard actions as in the current case of imposition of tariffs on steel import by the US government. Such traditional trade disputes - famous example: Bananas case (where the EU was found guilty for discrimination against banana imports by US companies in Latin America in 1997; or the Foreign Sales Corporation (the FCS scheme provided for an exemption to the general tax rules which results in substantial tax savings for US companies exporting though FSCSs) - involved or still involves (see current Boeing/Airbus case) usually a complaint of the EU against the US (see above). Some of those disputes concerning agriculture (see other group) and steel became increasingly frequent during the 1980, leading to the use of counter-measures in the case the defendant part did not offer any concessions (DS-mechanism of WTO). These so-called also “mini trade wars” account for only about 1-2 % of the total value of transatlantic trade and investment, but they are in the current media affairs and carry the potential to spill over to other areas of the transatlantic relationship3. They account for about 22% of EU trade, but represent over 47% of the EU s WTO disputes, therefore indicating its preference to use/take the profit of WTO DS- mechanism). Important to note: many authors have shown that primarily large countries will win trade wars4 and since the EU is talking with one single voice, its further integration increases its negotiating power in the WTO. But recent trade disputes show new occurrences: those of “new-style” regulatory disputes concerning the trade-distorting effects of “behind-the-border” domestic regulations that act as non-tariff barriers to international trade in goods, services and intellectual property5. The US and the EU face what some authors term “system friction” in an increasing number of issues: in consumer protection, the data privacy and audiovisual services, in public concerns about environment or the food safety (Trademarks and geographical indicators, GMOs, Beef hormones). These trade relations have moved into the public making trade a high-profile business reflecting rather the difference of ideological perceptions of the two societies than market-access clashes: the EU does not accept hormone treated beef because of the consumers health concern, not because it intends to protect EU farmers. The same argument is stated for GMOs which have to be subject to even more strict regulations, officially not to prevent US goods from the EU market, but because “European consumers fundamentally distrust genetically altered foods. 6 But can we go as far as to say that the old belief that freer trade is a win-win situation is questioned by the EU and the US? What does their considerable amount of cooperation consist of? Having looked at the issues over which the EU and the US come into conflict, we now turn our attention to those issues they agree on. Indeed, though they are fierce competitors on some trade fronts, they form the most important bilateral trade relationship in the world. To cite some numbers that illustrate this point: they account for 1/5 of each others’ bilateral trade, amounting to 1 billion euro a day; in 2003, 25.8% of EU exports were to the US, while 16.8% of goods imported to the EU came form the US. The EU invested more than 52% of its total FDI during the 1998-2001 period in the US, while US investment in the EU was more that 61% of EU FDI inflows during that same period.7 So clearly the two are important to each other, and the fact that they are also the two largest players in global trade explains why they cooperate significantly bilaterally but are also heavily involved in cooperation on the multilateral level, in particular and contrary to popular belief in the WTO. We should thus note that trade related disputes we and others have mentioned cover a very small percentage of EU-US trade. So although the media would tend to portray the EU-US trade relationship as bitter and acrimonious, it is in fact a partnership, where the key word is cooperation. Casting aside the multilateral scene to focus on the bilateral relationship, several initiatives illustrate this last point, i.e. that the EU and the US are committed partners. There is the New Transatlantic Agenda and EU-US Joint Action Plan of 1995, whose goals are stated in this text’s preface as: • “Promoting peace and stability, democracy and development around the world. Together, we will work for an increasingly stable and prosperous Europe; foster democracy and economic reform in Central and Eastern Europe as well as in Russia, Ukraine and other new independent states; secure peace in the Middle East; advance human rights; promote non-proliferation and cooperate on development and humanitarian assistance.” • “Responding to global challenges. Together, we will fight international crime, drug-trafficking and terrorism; address the needs of refugees and displaced persons; protect the environment and combat disease.” • “Contributing to the expansion of world trade and closer economic relations. Together, we will strengthen the multilateral trading system and take concrete, practical steps to promote closer economic relations between us.” • “Building bridges across the Atlantic. Together, we will work with our business people, scientists, educators and others to improve communication and to ensure that future generations remain as committed as we are to developing a full and equal partnership.”8 Then there is the Transatlantic Economic Partnership of 1998: it covers the two countries’ cooperation on multilateral issues and on bilateral issues that include technical regulatory barriers, services, government procurement, intellectual property, agriculture including food safety, plant and animal health and biotechnology, the environment, labour, consumers, competition law procedures, and electronic commerce.9 Finally we think another initiative worth mentioning is the 2002 Positive Economic Agenda, whose main achievements include: • Launch of the Financial Markets Dialogue; • Resumption of exports of Spanish clementines to the U.S.; • Launch of EU-U.S. regulatory co-operation in four priority areas: cosmetics, automobile safety, metrology and nutritional labeling; • Conclusion of the Mutual Recognition Agreement (MRA) on certificates of conformity for marine safety equipment.10 You see that all of these agreements aim to help achieve common objectives that are mutually beneficial to the two countries. If we now turn to the reasons for cooperation on the one hand and intense disagreement on the other, I think we can say that whereas cooperation on trade issues has occurred for economic, political and historical reasons, trade disputes between the US and the EU arise due for political considerations. What I mean by this is that it makes economic sense for the EU and the US to cooperate, and indeed they do, as we have shown; whereas the trade disputes are essentially economic nonsense, and occur because of a clash in vested political interests, often influenced by powerful lobbies. Further, it reflects the different consumer interests and ideological perceptions, perhaps even morals, between populations on both sides of the Atlantic. Having said this, recent trends show that the two have increased cooperation on topics where they had trade disputes, in particular standards and regulations. As to the question of what the trend of EU-US disputes will be in the future, we will leave that question open, with a poem by former EU Commissioner for Trade and current DG of the WTO Pascal Lamy as food for thought:
One of the most contentious issues in the alliance has been the stationing of U.S. Marines on Japan's Okinawa prefecture, which hosts around 65 percent of total U.S. forces in Japan and is also the poorest of Japan's forty-seven prefectures. Locals deeply resent the outsize burden of hosting U.S. troops at the Futenma base and have voiced serious concerns about the accidents and incidents of crime (including recurring cases of sexual assault) that have persisted on the base. The gang rape of a twelve-year-old girl in 1995 by three U.S. servicemen galvanized eighty-five thousand locals to protest. A year after the mass demonstration, then prime minister Ryutaro Hashimoto directly asked then U.S. president Bill Clinton to return Futenma to Japanese control. Other allegations of sexual violence by U.S. military personnel in Okinawa surfaced in 2008 and 2012, and various plans for relocating Futenma were put forward, but they were met with local opposition.¶ In a more recent bid to reconcile tensions, the United States and Japan agreed in May 2006 to a U.S.-Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation that would relocate the Futenma Air Station out of the crowded city of Ginowan, build a new runway in the waters off of Camp Schwab, and transfer eight thousand Marines to Guam. But this proposal devolved into a political maelstrom when the Democratic Party of Japan's Yukio Hatoyama, who opposed the relocation during his campaign, became prime minister in 2009.¶ Since then, Washington and Tokyo have made other overtures to resolve the long-standing issue. The two parties altered the pact in April 2012, disconnecting the transfer of Marines from the construction of the new base, and in April 2013 they reached a deal to return Futenma—and five other U.S. bases—by the late 2020s.¶ "It's been very corrosive for the alliance," Smith says of the Okinawa issue. "It has focused our attention on this one particular base, when the real challenge for the alliance has been to come up with a broader framework for the sustainability of U.S. forces in Japan."
The so-called “2 plus 2” meeting in Tokyo this week of US Secretary of State John Kerry and Defence Secretary Chuck Hagel with their Japanese counterparts marked a significant escalation of the US military build-up against China. The lengthy joint statement announced major deployments of hi-tech US weaponry to Japan and a green light for Japanese remilitarisation, within the framework of “a more robust alliance”. Thursday’s talks took place in the wake of the Obama administration’s decision to postpone an imminent military attack on Syria last month in the face of mass popular opposition, both in the United States and around the world. The “2 plus 2” meetings make clear that despite the postponement of war with Syria, Washington’s plans for military escalation are proceeding apace.¶ Washington’s decision to back down provoked consternation among US allies not only in the Middle East, but in Asia, where Obama’s “pivot” has encouraged Japan and other countries to adopt a more aggressive stance towards China.¶ Fears that American allies could be left out on a limb were underscored this week when Obama cancelled his high-profile trip to South East Asia amid the crisis in Washington generated by the government shutdown. While the Obama administration has repeatedly declared the “rebalancing” of US military forces to the Indo-Pacific region would be quarantined from austerity measures, such pledges are called into question by the political turmoil over the budget.¶ The “2 plus 2” meeting on Thursday sent the unmistakable message that the US is proceeding with its military build-up in Asia that includes stationing 60 percent of American naval and air force assets in the region by 2020. The American deployments announced in the joint statement are all directed at strengthening US-Japanese military against China. These include:¶ * The stationing of a second X-band early warning radar in Japan near Kyoto, as part of joint anti-ballistic missile systems. While nominally directed against North Korea’s primitive nuclear capabilities, these weapons are part of the Pentagon’s preparations for nuclear war against China and Russia.¶ * The basing of advanced P-8 surveillance and anti-submarine planes starting in December 2013 and long-range Global Hawk drones next year. The stepping up of US maritime surveillance in the East China and South China Seas, where the US “pivot” has exacerbated tense maritime disputes with China, including with Japan over the Senkaku/Diaoyu island, is particularly provocative.¶ * Two squadrons of MV-22 Osprey vertical take-off transport planes will enhance the capacity of the Japanese military to rapidly deploy troops in the event of a conflict over the Senkakus. The Pentagon also plans to deploy F-35B vertical take-off stealth fighters by 2017—again for the first time outside the US—boosting its ability to carry out its Air-Sea Battle strategy for a blitzkrieg against military targets inside China.¶ The Obama administration’s “pivot to Asia”, which began in mid-2009 and was openly announced in November 2011, has inflamed nationalism and militarism throughout the region. Nowhere is this more evident than in Japan, where the right-wing government of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, which took office last December, has boosted military spending, toughened its stance on the Senkakus, and taken steps to free the military from the constraints imposed by the Japanese constitution, which formally forbids external military aggression.¶ In the joint “2 by 2” statement, the US “welcomed” Japan’s “intention to make more proactive contributions to addressing the challenges faced by the international community”; its decision to establish a National Security Council; its expanded military budget; its re-examination of the legal basis for “collective self-defence; and “regional contributions, including capacity building effects vis-à-vis South East Asian countries.”¶ Abe is proceeding with his election pledge to build “a strong Japan” with “a strong military”. His government is seeking to either circumvent or amend the constitution to allow for “collective self-defence”—that is, the ability of Japanese imperialism to wage war with the US including “pre-emptive” military strikes. Japan has already pledged to boost the coast guard in the Philippines—the former US colony and leading South East Asian partner in confronting China.¶ The “2 by 2” statement also laid out closer US-Japanese military collaboration in intelligence sharing, cyber warfare and “space-based maritime domain awareness”—that is, the use of spy satellites for surveillance of the Western Pacific. Japan and the US also reaffirmed their agreement on US military bases on Okinawa, which have provoked deep popular opposition. Tokyo has agreed to pay $3.1 billion towards the relocation of 9,000 US Marines to Guam as part of the Pentagon’s broader restructuring of US forces throughout the region, including to Australia and the Philippines.¶ This week’s ministerial meeting was the first time that such high-level talks were held in Tokyo, rather than Washington, in recognition of Japan’s “greater responsibilities”. The Obama administration clearly regards the Abe government as a central partner in its efforts to contain and prepare for war against China. The planned revision of the “Guidelines for Japan-US Defence Cooperation” will formalise “robust” new military arrangements.¶ The escalation of US military deployments to East Asia and US encouragement of Japanese militarism as an adjunct to the Pentagon testify to the utter recklessness of US foreign policy. Staggered by an intractable capitalist crisis in the United States and worldwide, US imperialism is intensifying its pursuit of global hegemony through military intimidation and war.¶ Amid growing popular opposition to war, the tempo of US military aggression has accelerated since the outbreak of the global economic crisis in 2008, threatening an even greater conflagration. Having temporarily stepped back from an attack on Syria—a war that risked a confrontation with Iran, Russia and China—the US has stepped up its preparations for just such a conflict.¶ In every country, the drive to war is being accompanied by the whipping up of poisonous nationalism and a relentless assault on the living standards of working people. The only social force able to prevent war is an independent movement of the international working class to abolish its root cause—global capitalism and its outmoded nation state system—and reorganise the world economy on socialist lines for the benefit of all humanity.
Forged in the wake of World War II, the U.S.-Japan security alliance has served as one of the region's most important military relationships and as an anchor of the U.S. security role in Asia. Revised in 1960, the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security grants the United States the right to military bases on the archipelago in exchange for a U.S. pledge to defend Japan in the event of an attack. The partnership has endured several geopolitical transitions, rooting its framework in the postwar security environment and expanding in the aftermath of the Cold War with the rise of China and a nuclearizing North Korea. Cooperation during the Gulf and Iraq wars and the March 2011 Tohoku earthquake reaffirmed the strength of the alliance, but challenges remain. The U.S. military presence on Okinawa, North Korea's nuclearization, territorial disputes with China, and Japan's recent push to upgrade its defense preparedness have all challenged the alliance's resilience as the Obama administration considers the direction of its strategic pivot to the Asia-Pacific region.
The coordination between U.S. and Japanese military forces after the devastating March 2011 earthquake and consequent tsunami that struck Tohoku demonstrated the resilience of the alliance. The SDF conducted rescue operations in tandem with thousands of U.S. forces under Operation Tomodachi, the largest bilateral mission in the history of the alliance. U.S. forces aided the SDF in clearing Sendai's airport, assisted in search-and-rescue teams, and prepared Japan's defense readiness.¶ This high level of support echoed Japan's own cooperation during the Gulf and Iraq wars. In November 2001, the government of Junichiro Koizumi dispatched the Maritime Self-Defense Force to the Indian Ocean to support U.S. military operations in Afghanistan, marking Japan's first overseas military action during a combat operation. A year later, Japan drafted a bill that would allow the SDF to be dispatched to postwar Iraq, and in 2003 it sent forces to aid in postwar reconstruction efforts.¶ At a 2 + 2 meeting in early October 2013, the United States agreed to deploy reconnaissance drones to Japan, which also pledged up to $3.1 billion to relocate five thousand U.S. Marines from Okinawa to Guam. Ministers also agreed to rewrite the guidelines for U.S.-Japanese Defense Cooperation for the first time since 1997 in revisions that would expand cooperation on counterterrorism and bolster the allies' ability to respond to an attack on Japan.¶ "The United States has an even bigger role—to not only mediate, but create a new framework of cooperation in the region." —Yukio Okamoto, former special adviser to prime ministers Ryutaro Hashimoto and Junichiro Koizumi¶ In July 2014, Japan took a step toward a more active role in regional security when Abe announced that his cabinet had approved a reinterpretation of the antiwar Constitution that would allow Japanese forces to aid friendly nations under attack. The decision marks a significant shift from a position that had strictly limited Japan to act solely in its own defense. "Japan, for half a century, has expanded its military capability in ways that raise questions about the interpretation of Article Nine in its constitution," says Smith. "And the question has become, 'How much can Japan do in the alliance?'"¶ Some experts have defined the modern-day alliance to be more inclusive, advocating initiatives such as trade and energy cooperation as the road to a future framework. "This is bigger than just the military. These are instruments we use to improve our own national prosperity and security, and that's fundamentally what this alliance should be about," Smith says.¶ The multilateral Trans-Pacific Partnership has been a highly promising economic development that observers hope will tighten the alliance. After the Fukushima nuclear disaster forced Japan to reconsider its energy policies, Washington agreed to a long-term liquefied natural gas export deal with Japan that could see the United States become a supplier for the island country.¶ "This is the most relevant the alliance has been in a long time," says Lind. "With the ebb and flow of what's going on in the region, these are two countries that are highly incentivized to make this work."
Russian President Vladimir Putin has called for better relations between Russia and the United States in a congratulatory message to President Barack Obama on the U.S. Independence Day holiday. Putin expressed hope in his message Friday that the currently strained relations between the two nations will develop on a "pragmatic and equal foundation" despite their differences. The Russian president said the two nations carry special responsibility for safeguarding international stability and security, and should therefore cooperate in the interests of the entire world. Relations between Washington and Moscow have been at a low not seen since the Cold War since Russia annexed Ukraine's Crimean peninsula earlier this year. The U.S. and its European allies have curbed diplomatic cooperation with Russia and introduced sanctions in response to the annexation. The United States and the European Union have threatened to enact more sanctions aimed at ending Moscow's support for pro-Russian separatists inside Ukraine's borders.
Washington (CNN) -- The United States predicts the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, likely by pro-Russian rebels, will fundamentally shift the relationship between Russia and the international community. "It is a game-changer," one senior State Department official said. While Washington has stopped short of blaming Russia, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Samantha Power said Friday the United States believes the jet carrying nearly 300 people was downed by a surface-to-air missile fired by pro-Russian rebels in eastern Ukraine. Due to the sophistication of the Buk missile system believed to have been used, Power said it was "unlikely that the separatists could effectively operate the system without assistance from knowledgeable personnel." That means "we cannot rule out technical assistance from Russian personnel in operating the systems," she added. Officials said regardless of whether Russian operatives were manning the system, Russia bears responsibility for the attack because of its military and political support for the rebels. In recent weeks, Russia has intensified its delivery of sophisticated military equipment, officials said. "While it may take us some time to firmly establish who shot down a plane filled with innocents, most (U.N. Security Council) members and most members of the international community have been warning for months about the devastation that would come if Russia did not stop what it started, if it did not rein in what it unleashed," Power said. Another senior U.S. official said that the "responsibility is Russia's whether they had Russian personnel there or they gave them equipment and an instruction manual" on what to do. "These separatist leaders are taking orders from Russia and (Russian President Vladimir Putin) has to realize the consequence of sending heavy and sophisticated weapons to a gang of sociopaths, extremists, violent thugs, nationalists and agents who are just given weapons and told to make chaos," the official said.
Be all this as it may, Chicken Little is wrong; nor, indeed, is this "the lowest point [in U.S.-Russia relations] since the fall of the Soviet Union," as Kathy Lally solemnly observed in a recent Washington Post article. The title of her article is here revealing: "U.S.-Russia relations turn chilly—again." The key word is, of course, "again," and it reinforces two simple truths: we have seen this before, and matters between the two have been worse. Let us pose the question: Is the current state of affairs actually worse than, or even as bad as, that which arose from the expansion of NATO to Russia's borders in the 1990s? Or the bombing of Russia's ally, Serbia, by U.S.-led NATO forces in 1999? On the personal level, there was the infamous photograph of Obama and Putin seated together at the June 2013 summit in Northern Ireland, each in a grim "I'd rather not be here," eye-contact –avoiding pose. But is this actually worse than the caustic exchange between Putin and then-President George W. Bush at the Beijing Olympics, when differences over Russian-Georgian hostilities provoked the description of Putin by Bush: "cold as ice"?
Putin’s return should serve as a wakeup call for President Obama and his advisers. The “reset” policy profoundly misreads not only why U.S.-Russia relations chilled in the first place, but also what is truly required to improve them. The problem was not U.S. rhetoric or actions, but the nature of the Russian regime. U.S.-Russian relations will not be on a firm footing until Moscow changes its strategic outlook and the Russian people are truly free to choose their own leaders. Rather than coddle the Kremlin, the Obama administration should embrace the strategic goal of helping Russia move toward a truly representative democracy. Unfortunately, the administration’s focus on questionable efforts to obtain Russian acquiescence on certain issues — such as the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, limited cooperation on Iran, and the Northern Distribution Network into Afghanistan — has prevented administration officials from speaking frankly and repeatedly about the true nature of the Russian regime. Instead, administration officials tried to argue that the iPad-toting, tweeting President Medvedev represented a more moderate face of the new Russia, and that administration priorities with Russia were aimed at bolstering Medvedev vis-à-vis Putin. In November 2010, Vice President Biden outlined the administration’s thinking, telling journalists: “I do believe that there is a play here.” Biden added: “Medvedev has rested everything on this notion of a reset. Who knows what Putin would do? My guess is he would not have gone there [in terms of committing to the reset], but maybe.” The administration’s investment in Medvedev came even as opposition parties were harassed and blocked from competing in elections, peaceful protesters jailed, journalists beaten and killed, and routine legal norms repeatedly violated under Medvedev’s leadership. Russia’s rhetoric and threatening actions toward its neighbors also changed little under Medvedev, and the U.S. “reset” had the unfortunate affect of implying to U.S. allies in the region that Washington was all too willing to overlook their interests in the pursuit of cooperation with Moscow. Moving forward, the Obama administration should recognize that there are few areas in which genuine U.S.-Russian cooperation is both possible and mutually advantageous. Combating the spread of nuclear weapons may seem like such an area, but experience has shown that Russia has little desire to deal seriously with proliferators like Iran and North Korea. Indeed, Russia has repeatedly rebuffed and watered down Obama’s attempt to address Iran’s, Syria’s, and North Korea’s nuclear misbehavior in the U.N. Security Council. Russia has also blocked U.S. and European efforts to condemn the brutal crackdown underway in Syria by the regime of Bashar al-Assad, and dragged its feet as the Security Council debated the emerging crisis in Libya earlier this year. The United States will continue to need Russia’s permission to fly over its territory to supply NATO forces in Afghanistan via the Northern Distribution Network — even more so as U.S.-Pakistani ties deteriorate — but this alone is not a reason to gloss over Russia’s record. The Obama administration should instead take this opportunity to advance a democracy-centered approach to Moscow. The United States must make clear that Russia’s authoritarianism is unacceptable. Every beating and killing of a journalist, every mass arrest at an opposition rally, every rigged election, and every thuggish public statement made by a member of the regime must be roundly and repeatedly condemned by the U.S. government at the highest levels. Recent legislative sanctions sponsored by Sen. Ben Cardin (D., Md.) in response to the murder of Russian tax lawyer Sergei Magnitsky are a worthy and notable example of this approach. In addition, the United States should use Russia’s interest in accession to the World Trade Organization to raise the profile of these human-rights concerns. The administration must also do more to assist our ally Georgia, including through weapons sales, which have not occurred since Russia’s 2008 invasion. With the return of Vladimir Putin, U.S.-Russian relations are headed for even more turbulent times. Unfortunately, the White House seems oblivious to that reality. In response to Putin’s announcement, Biden’s November 2010 caution was thrown to the wind as White House spokesman Tommy Vietor declared: “While we have had a very strong working relationship with President Medvedev, it’s worth noting that Vladimir Putin was prime minister through the reset. . . . We will continue to build on the progress of the reset whoever serves as the next president of Russia.”
These numerous disagreements do not mean that Russia is an enemy. After all, Russia has not supported al Qaeda or any other terrorist group at war with the United States and no longer promotes a rival ideology with the goal of world domination. Nor has it invaded or threatened to invade its neighbors. Finally, Russia has opted not to foment separatism in Ukraine, despite the existence there of a large and vocal Russian minority population. Putin and his advisers accept that the United States is the most powerful nation in the world and that provoking it needlessly makes little sense. But they are no longer willing to adjust their behavior to fit U.S. preferences, particularly at the expense of their own interests.
That does not mean, however, that we are on the brink of a new Cold War era of confrontation with Russia. Russia’s primary goal for the next generation will be economic growth and modernization of the country. The needs there are immense. A Cold War–like military competition bankrupted the USSR, and no serious Russian politician wants to re-run that kind of exercise today. The Russian political elite also understand that to have any chance of meeting their ambitious economic goals, they will have to be more and not less integrated in the global economy and especially with Europe. Their real, not imaginary threats are currently radical Islam and terrorism to the south and longer-term concern about China’s development to the east: neither contingency will be effectively addressed by hostility toward the West, just the opposite. On the darker side, we should expect increasing Russian assertiveness often contrary to our interests in the countries on its western periphery including Ukraine, Georgia, and others.
Working constructively with Russia does not mean nominating Putin for the Nobel Peace Prize or inviting him to address a joint session of Congress. Nor is anyone encouraging Russia to join NATO or welcoming it as a great democratic friend. What Washington must do is work with Russia to advance essential U.S. interests in the same way that the United States works with other important nondemocratic states, such as China, Kazakhstan, and Saudi Arabia. This means avoiding both misplaced affection and the unrealistic sense that the United States can take other countries for granted without consequences. Few deny that such cooperation should be pursued, but Washington's naive and self-serving conventional wisdom holds that the United States can secure Russia's cooperation in areas important to the United States while maintaining complete freedom to ignore Russian priorities. U.S. officials believe that Moscow should uncritically support Washington against Iran and Islamist terrorists on the theory that Russia also considers them threats. However, this argument ignores the fact that Russia views the Iranian threat very differently. Although Russia does not want a nuclear-armed Iran, it does not feel the same sense of urgency over the issue and may be satisfied with intrusive inspections preventing industrial-scale uranium enrichment. Expecting Russia to accommodate the United States on Iran without regard to U.S. policy on other issues is the functional equivalent of expecting Iraqis to welcome the U.S. and coalition troops as liberators in that it fundamentally ignores the other side's perspective on U.S. actions.
Beyond the accessibility and availability of biological agents is the hurdle of having financial means to acquire them. Aum Shinrikyo had considerable options, as they were one of the most well funded terrorist organizations. With roughly $1 billion in funds, they owned several buildings, including hidden medical facilities, and were able to fund bioweapon trials (Thompson, 2006). While individuals like Larry Wayne Harris were able to pay for these organisms online, the availability of these pathogens has been regulated in recent years to prevent such events from occurring (Tucker, 2000). Acquiring an agent via theft can also be monetarily taxing, as bribes and the equipment to transport the pathogen could be costly. Attempting to isolate a pathogen naturally is also extremely expensive, requiring all the necessary laboratory equipment, which in the case of viruses, is extensive. Beyond the technical know-how needed for this method, the purchasing of the equipment alone is a major deterrent. One can not simply collect dirt and isolate anthrax.
Heat, moisture, and precipitation can also severely impact the ability to release a pathogen into the environment. Most agents are extremely vulnerable to sunlight and heat. Biological agents released in the day, like those used by Aum Shinrikyo, have significantly higher failure rates. UV radiation is a significant vulnerability for microorganisms, with many unable to survive longer than 30 minutes in sunlight. While anthrax is able to survive these tough conditions as a result of its induced spore form, humidity in the air may hinder its ability to disperse (Tucker, 2000). Rainy seasons and environments with relative high humidity levels can prevent microorganisms from aerosolizing.
Altitude draws upon all of the aforementioned environmental conditions. As Aum Shinrikyo found through their rooftop dissemination attempt, locations too high may face wind, rain, and smog conditions that render these attempts useless. The oxygen levels of high altitude conditions can also increase the rate of microbial decay, as some bacteria are aerobic, meaning they require oxygen. The biggest concern with high-altitude dissemination attempts is the role of wind and geographical distance. Wind changes can alter the course of pathogen distribution, but also inhibit its spread. Higher altitude locations will have higher wind speeds, which will break down the aerosol’s integrity. Aum Shinrikyo thought that a higher building would equate to a larger geographical distribution, however, it also heavily contributed to their failure (Thompson, 2006; Rosenau, 2001).
While most do not know the intricacies of its methods, disease surveillance provides a substantial strategy for diminishing the impact of bioterrorist events. Disease surveillance is the systematic collection and analysis of data to identify and monitor patterns within disease distribution. Public health is designed to provide disease surveillance and epidemiological response in cases of disease outbreaks. While not all countries have the same level of surveillance capability, governments, both nationally and through international agreements, have created public health organizations to prevent and control the spread of disease.
Air and surface sampling techniques currently used by the US government are effective in fighting bioterrorism and potentially saving lives, a Saint Louis University researcher finds.
In short, the data on al-Qaeda-linked or -influenced militants indicted in the United States suggests that the threat of terrorism has actually markedly declined over the past couple of years. Where Feinstein and Rogers were on much firmer ground in their interview with Crowley was when they pointed to the resurgence of a number of al Qaeda groups in the Middle East. Al Qaeda's affiliates in Syria control much of the north of the country and are the most effective forces fighting the regime of Bashar al-Assad. In neighboring Iraq, al Qaeda has enjoyed a renaissance of late, which partly accounts for the fact that the violence in Iraq today is as bad as it was in 2008. The Syrian war is certainly a magnet for militants from across the Muslim world, including hundreds from Europe, and European governments are rightly concerned that returning veterans of the Syrian conflict could foment terrorism in Europe. But, at least for the moment, these al Qaeda groups in Syria and Iraq are completely focused on overthrowing the Assad regime or attacking what they regard as the Shia-dominated government of Iraq. And, at least so far, these groups have shown no ability to attack in Europe, let alone in the United States.
Despite an increase in the volume of terrorism worldwide, terrorist attacks remain statistically rare events. Unlike bank robbers, who go where the money is, terrorists can attack anything, anywhere, any time. Statisticians treat terrorist attacks as random events. Terrorists can avoid security by attacking soft targets, such as public places that are difficult to protect. That terrorists have moved toward softer targets can be interpreted as an indirect indicator that security works. However, it also may reflect the terrorists' growing determination to kill in quantity, which can be done most easily in crowded public places. Not all terrorist perpetrators worry about being caught in the act, or even about escaping. Even the terrorists' operational failures cause fear, which is the objective of terrorism. The psychological effects of terrorism make it hard to apply an economic cost-benefit analysis. While terrorism ranks low as a source of risk, the people regard it as a major danger—public tolerance for terrorism is near zero. Many criticize security as being "just for show." However, illusion is an important component of security. The objective is to convince would-be attackers that they will fail. We tend to focus on detection and prevention. Judging by the evidence, the most important effect of security is deterrence. There are very few instances where terrorists are caught trying to smuggle weapons or bombs on board airliners. If deterrence is working, that means fewer attempts, but it is difficult to count things that don't occur.
In examining the terrorist scenario, Mueller analyzes the process of funding, designing, building, transporting, and detonating a weapon and breaks the process down into 20 clearly identified tasks. As he stresses, the terrorist needs to succeed at each task, while those who wish to stop him require only one success. Even the very generous 50-50 odds that he gives for each stage in the process mean the accumulated likelihood of success is less than one in a million. Examined through that lens, a decision to pursue nuclear weapons seems ludicrous. It makes no sense for a terrorist organization to invest huge sums of money, time, and effort in such a risky enterprise because its purpose can be served much more easily by strapping a few pounds of gelignite to the body of a fanatic and sending him into a crowded train. For these reasons, Mueller is not greatly concerned by reports that al Qaeda has been seeking nuclear material and information for bomb-making.
The possibility of a terrorist nuclear attack on the United States is widely believed to be a grave, even apocalyptic, threat and a likely possibility, a belief supported by numerous statements by public officials. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, “the inevitability of the spread of nuclear terrorism” and of a “successful terrorist attack” have been taken for granted.48
The threat of terrorism is, of course, real. It demands that governments act to protect the safety of their citizens and their realms. As Canada’s deputy prime minister, Anne McLellan, said in a speech in 2004: “We must always be vigilant about new threats, and we must always be looking for ways to improve and coordinate our intelligence, our prevention strategies and our emergency response capabilities. We must continuously review our plans, update our systems and test our people.” This all makes perfect sense, and for a government to do anything less would be downright irresponsible in terms of protecting Canadians and of ensuring Canada’s continued access to the all-important US market. This is, however, a very far cry from the jeremiads of pundits of all professions and persuasions, who daily proclaim that, because of international terrorism, we are now living in a world of unprecedented danger and that combating terrorism should be or should become the first and overarching priority of all Western governments. Such pronouncements, in fact, betray a wilful or woeful ignorance of history, and of contemporary realities.
The high cost of doing business in the Arctic suggests that only the world’s largest oil companies, most likely as partners in joint venture projects, have the financial, technical, and managerial strength to accomplish the costly, long-lead-time projects dictated by Arctic conditions. Incentives to settle outstanding disputes would rise with the increasing potential economic returns posed by exploitation and the resulting polarization within the international system. While there are disagreements between the Arctic states on maritime boundaries, there are still reasons to believe that these disagreements can be resolved amicably. The prospect for conflicts relating to unresolved boundary disputes seems remote. The existing vehicles for dispute resolution and cooperation in the region, UNCLOS and the Arctic Council, will also help to reduce tensions. Joint management of resource fields is another option that might come into play as countries involved in a dispute might see more advantage in approaching the disagreement this way rather than losing a claim in an international tribunal. Cooperation between Norway and Iceland regarding the development of the Dreki field could serve as a model for similar arrangements in the future. Another example is the continental shelf dispute concerning an area rich in natural gas between Russia and Norway in the Barents Sea. Both countries dispute the other's interpretation of where their borders extend into the offshore EEZ. While it is possible that there could be a conflict between the two countries over this area, it seems highly unlikely given the potential costs versus the potential benefits. Geopolitical issues are not exclusively conflicts over interests, although such concerns tend to dominate. They can also reflect cooperative, multilateral initiatives by which a state pursues its interests vis-à-vis others. Such cooperative ventures are often considered desirable and even unavoidable when a state is seeking a result that cannot be achieved unilaterally. At the same time, cooperation frequently establishes a level of governance – in some cases formally, in others less formally – by which mutual understanding can clarify intentions and help to build trust. Recognizing and respecting each others rights constitutes the legal basis for cooperation between Arctic and non-Arctic states. In accordance with UNCLOS and other relevant international laws, Arctic states have sovereign rights and jurisdiction in their respective areas in the region, while non-Arctic states also enjoy rights of scientific research and navigation. To develop a partnership of cooperation, Arctic and non-Arctic states should, first and foremost, recognize and respect each other's rights under the international law. Examples between Arctic and non-Arctic states are there. On 22 November 2010, the Sovcomflot Group (SCF) and China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) signed a strategic long-term cooperation agreement. The parties agreed to develop a long-term partnership in the sphere of seaborne energy solutions, with the SCF fleet serving the continually growing Chinese imports of hydrocarbons. Taking into account the significant experience gained by Sovcomflot in developing the transportation of hydrocarbons in the Arctic seas, SCF and CNPC agreed upon the format for coordination in utilizing the transportation potential of the Northern Sea Route along Russia’s Arctic coast, both for delivering transit shipments of hydrocarbons and for the transportation of oil and gas from Russia’s developing Arctic offshore fields to China. A new fleet of tankers designed to operate in ice as well as additional heavy-duty ice breakers will be built to that end. South Korea´s Samsung Industries is looking into filling the technological gap to make it possible to deliver Arctic natural gas across the pacific ocean to East Asia. Russia is building massive duel-bowed oil tankers that are set to come into use as soon as next year. While traveling forward, the ships move as they normally would through open water. But when the vessels move backward, they can act as ice-breakers. Construction is underway on two 70,000-tonne ships and two more 125,000 tonne ships and there are rumors that another five are on order.
BRUSSELS - The Arctic has become a new frontier in international relations, but fear of potential conflict in the resource-rich region is overblown, say experts. For long a mystery because of its general impenetrability, melting ice caps are revealing more and more of the Arctic region to scientists, researchers and industry. Climate change experts can take a more precise look at a what global warming is doing to the planet, shipping trade routes once considered unthinkable are now possible, and governments and businesses are in thrall to the potential exploitation of coal, iron, rare earths and oil. The interest is reflected in the growing list of those wanting to have a foot in the Arctic council, a forum of eight countries with territory in the polar region. While the US, Denmark, Iceland, Finland, Norway, Sweden, Russia and Canada form the council, the EU commission, China, India, South Korea and Japan have all expressed an interest in having a permanent observer status. "The Arctic has become a new meeting place for America, Europe and the Asia Pacific," says Damien Degeorges, founder of the Arctic Policy and Economic Forum. During a recent conference on Arctic shipping routes in the European Parliament, Degeorges noted that "China has been the most active by far in the last years." He points to its red-carpet treatment of politicians from Greenland, a territory that recently got full control over its wealth of natural resources. Bejing also cosied up to Iceland after the island's financial meltdown. The two undertook a joint expedition to the North Pole and the Chinese have the largest foreign embassy in Reykjavik. Meanwhile, South Korea's president visited Greenland last year and shipping hubs like Singapore are holding Arctic conferences. The interest is being spurred by melting icebergs. Last year saw a record low of multi-year ice - permanent ice - in the polar sea. This means greater shipping and mineral exploitation potential. There were 37 transits of the North East Passage (NEP), running from the Atlantic to the Pacific along the top of Russia, in 2011. This rose to 47 in 2012. For a ship travelling from the Netherlands to China, the route around 40 percent shorter than using the traditional Suez Canal. A huge saving for China, where 50 percent of its GDP is connected to shipping. Russia is also keen to exploit the route as the rise in temperatures is melting the permafrost in its northern territory, playing havoc with its roads and railways. According to Jan Fritz Hansen, deputy director of the Danish shipowners’ association, the real breakthrough will come when there is a cross polar route. At the moment there are are two options - the North East Passge for which Russia asks high fees for transiting ships - or the much-less developed North West Passage along Canada. His chief concern is that "trade up there is free. We don't want protectionism. Everyone should be allowed to compete up there." And he believes the biggest story of the Arctic is not how it is traversed but what will be taken out of it. According to the US Geological Survey (2009), the Arctic holds 13 percent of undiscovered oil and 30 percent of undiscovered gas supplies. Greenland is already at the centre of political tussle between the EU and China over future exploitation of its rare earths - used in a range of technologies such as hybrid cars or smart phones. "The biggest adventure will be the Arctic destination. There is a lot of valuable goods that should be taken out of nature up there," he said. This resource potential - although tempered by the fact that much of it is not economically viable to exploit - has led to fears that the Arctic region is ripe for conflict. But this is nonsense, says Nil Wang, a former Danish admiral and Arctic expert. Most resources have an owner "There is a general public perception that the Arctic region holds great potential for conflict because it is an ungoverned region where all these resources are waiting to be picked up by the one who gets there first. That is completely false," he said. He notes that it is an "extremely well-regulated region," with international rules saying that coastal states have territorial jurisdiction up to 12 nautical miles off their coast. On top of that is a further 200 nautical miles of exclusive economic zone "where you own every value in the water and under the seabed." "Up to 97 percent of energy resources is actually belonging to someone already," says Wang. He suggest the actors in the region all want to create a business environment, which requires stable politics and security.
U.S. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel has called on nations to cooperate to avoid conflict as they develop the rapidly thawing Arctic region. In a speech on Friday in Halifax, Canada, Hagel also repeated that the United States will "exercise sovereignty" in order to maintain freedom of navigation in the region. He added that Washington will seek deeper military ties with other Arctic states, including Russia and Canada. Last year, Arctic ice shrank to its lowest levels since observation from satellite began in the 1970s, and experts believe that by 2050, summer ice will vanish in the Arctic altogether due to global climate change. As the ice melts, competition is increasing to develop energy resources and control transportation lanes. In September Russian President Vladimir Putin said Russia will reestablish a Soviet-era base to patrol the Northern Sea route.
War and conflict sell papers -- the prospect of war, current wars, remembrance of wars past. Accordingly, a growing cottage industry devotes itself to writing about the prospect of conflict among the Arctic nations and between those nations and non-Arctic states, which is mostly code for “China.” As a follower of Arctic news, I see this every day, all the time: eight articles last week, five more already this week from the Moscow Times, Scientific American or what-have-you. Sometimes this future conflict is portrayed as a political battle, sometimes military, but the portrayals of the states involved are cartoonish, Cold-War-ish...it’s all good guys and bad guys. I’m convinced that this is nonsense, and I feel vindicated when I see the extent to which these countries' militaries collaborate in the high North. From last week's meeting of all eight Arctic nations' military top brass (excepting only the US; we were represented by General Charles Jacoby, head of NORAD and USNORTHCOM) to Russia-Norway collaboration on search & rescue; from US-Canada joint military exercises to US-Russia shared research in the Barents...no matter where you look, the arc of this relationship bends towards cooperation. But there's a bigger misconception that underlies the predictions of future Arctic conflict that we read every week. This is the (usually) unspoken assumption that the governments of these states are capable of acting quickly, unilaterally and secretly to pursue their interests in the Arctic. False. This idea that some state might manage a political or military smash-and-grab while the rest of us are busy clipping our fingernails or walking the dog is ridiculous. The overwhelming weight of evidence suggests that the governments of the Arctic states are, like most massive organizations, bureaucratic messes. Infighting between federal agencies is rampant all around, as are political shoving matches between federal and state/provincial/regional governments. Money is still scarce, and chatter about military activism isn’t backed up by much: Canada is engaged in a sad debate over the downgrading of the proposed Nanisivik port; the United States’ icebreaker fleet is barely worth mentioning and shows little sign of new life in the near-term future; US Air Force assets are being moved 300+ miles south from Fairbanks to Anchorage; and Russia’s talk about a greater Arctic presence has been greatly inflated for the sake of the recent elections. In a more general sense, we have viciously polarized governments in the US and, to a lesser extent, Canada, as well as numerous “hotter” wars elsewhere that will take the lion’s share of our blood and treasure before the Arctic gets a drop of either. The smaller states might be able to act more nimbly, but Norway and Denmark are successful Scandinavian social-market economies with modestly-sized militaries who aren’t likely to put military adventurism in the Arctic at the top of their to-do lists. They’re also patient decision-makers who are making apparently sincere (if not always successful) efforts to incorporate their resident indigenous communities into national politics. This makes fast, unilateral, secret action unlikely. And then there is Russia. From the outside, it can often seem as though the Russian government rules by fiat. This reasonably leads to the concern that someone might take it into his head to assert Russia’s military might or otherwise extend the country’s sovereignty in the Arctic. But it is fairly clear that Russia’s success is currently, and for the near-term future, dependent on its position within the constellation of global hydrocarbon suppliers. To continue to develop its supply base, Russia needs the assistance of the oil majors of neighboring states, and indeed it is showing signs of warming up to foreign engagement with its Arctic hydrocarbons in significant ways. Its political relationships with its regular customers are also critical to its future success. Russia isn’t likely to wantonly sour those relationships by acting aggressively against all four of its wealthy, well-networked littoral brothers in Europe and North America. It’s not only the handcuffs of many colors worn by the Arctic states that will keep them from getting aggressive, it is also the good precedents that exist for cooperation here. Russia and Norway recently resolved a forty year-old dispute over territory in the Barents. There are regular examples of military cooperation among the four littoral NATO states and between Norway and Russia. Even the US and Russia are finding opportunities to work together. Meanwhile, the need to develop search-and-rescue capabilities is making cross-border cooperation a necessity for all Arctic actors. There are numerous international research and private-sector ventures, even in areas other than hydrocarbons. These will only grow in importance with time. In fact, it would seem that for many of these countries, the Arctic is a welcome relief - a site where international collaboration is comparatively amicable.
As the U.S. begins to withdraw troops from Afghanistan, Russia and China have both declared a desire to increase their military presence throughout Central and South Asia. This new regional alignment, however, should not be viewed as a threat to U.S. strategic national interests but seen rather as concurrent with strategic and regional interests of the United States: regional peace, stability and the prevention of future terrorist safe havens in ungoverned territories. As China and Russia begin to flex their military muscles, the U.S. military should harness their expanded regional influence to promote proactively a new period of responsible multilateral support for Afghanistan and Pakistan. This past December it became clearer that Russia had begun to re-assert its regional presence when the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) granted Russia the veto power over any member state's future decision to host a foreign military. CSTO members, including Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan, have become increasingly valuable U.S. partners in the Northern Distribution Network after Pakistan shut down U.S. military supply routes running from the south into Afghanistan when NATO troops killed 24 Pakistani soldiers last November in the border area of Salala. Though it appears the route may soon open again, the United States must still adopt a new strategy that works more closely with Russia and the CSTO to maintain the Northern Distribution Network long into the future, which currently accounts for about 60 percent of all cargo transiting Central Asia en route to Afghanistan. Certainly, the U.S. risks being unable to control many aspects of the Northern Distribution Network as it withdraws from the region, and this may in turn adversely affect Afghanistan's future success. However, if the United States remains concerned about leaving the region to a historically obdurate regional rival like Russia, it should also bear in mind that Russia has a vital strategic interest in the future stability of the region. Russia has approximately 15 million Muslims living within its borders, with an estimated 2 million Muslims in Moscow. Russia is fearful of what occurs on its periphery and wants to minimize the spread of Muslim extremism that may originate from an unstable Afghanistan or Pakistan. In addition, Russia does not want regional instability that threatens its oil and gas investments. In particular, Russia wants to ensure that it continues to influence the planning and implementation of the potentially lucrative natural gas pipeline that may one day traverse Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and India. In a recent meeting with Pakistani Foreign Minister Hina Rabbani Khar, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov discussed Russia's commitment to preserving peace and stability throughout the AfPak region, and rejected the use of violence by al-Qaeda and its affiliates that aim to undermine the current Afghan government. Furthermore, he pledged to bolster bilateral ties and work cooperatively with Pakistan to achieve stability in Afghanistan. A newly-elected President Vladimir Putin also recently wrote in a campaign brief that "Russia will help Afghanistan develop its economy and strengthen its military to fight terrorism and drug production." It is not lost on the U.S. government that Russia is proposing to succeed where the U.S. has struggled. However, if Russia does succeed in helping establish a secure Afghanistan and Pakistan that can prevent the spread of bases for terrorism then it is a victory for everyone. Aside from Pakistan, and in line with promoting security throughout the region, Russia announced recently that it will provide $16 million to Kyrgyzstan to assist with border security in the south. Russia also agreed recently to pay $15 million in back rent for its four military facilities across the country, including an air base, a torpedo test center on Lake Issyk-Kul, and a communications center in the south. Further, Russia signed a security pact with Tajikistan last fall to extend its basing lease for 49 years, in addition to a bilateral agreement that will enable Russia to become more integrated into Tajikistan's border security forces that oversee an 830-mile border with Afghanistan. Providing similar types of U.S. aid and security support will also help ensure that the valuable Northern Distribution Network remains open and secure for supply lines into Afghanistan. If the northern trade routes are shut down it would adversely affect aid arriving to Afghanistan and therefore jeopardize the stability of Afghanistan and the region. It would also be in opposition to Russia's regional interests. Rather than citing these examples in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan as a demonstration of how the U.S. will soon lose out in the region to a resurgent Russia, policymakers can view them as an indication of how Russian interests align with the U.S. to help maintain regional security. More importantly, if Russia wants to take a more active future role in Central Asia, the U.S. should address this shift and work directly with Russia and other CSTO members to ensure that the Northern Distribution Network remains operational in the distant future.
“A minor military clash in the South China Sea is, rather worryingly, a distinct and growing possibility,” according to Ian Storey from the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore. Storey, an expert on Asia Pacific maritime security, goes even further. He envisions the possibility of differences over fishing rights or energy exploration turning into a military clash. “Caused by miscalculation, misperception or miscommunication, it’s just a question of time before one these skirmishes results in loss of life,” Storey said. A South China Sea War is Unlikely But that doesn’t mean a war. Storey said an escalation into full-blown conflict is unlikely. “It is in no country’s interests to spill blood or treasure over this issue – the costs far outweigh the benefits,” Storey said. Other experts agree. James Holmes of the U.S. Naval War College says admires how China has been able to get its way in spreading it claims of sovereignty without becoming a bully. “[China] gradually consolidated the nation's maritime claims while staying well under the threshold for triggering outside -most likely American -intervention,” said Holmes. “Is war about to break out over bare rocks? I don't think so.” writes Robert D. Kaplan, Chief Political Strategist for the geopolitical analysis group Stratfor. Kaplan, however, doesn’t give much hope for negotiations. “The issues involved are too complex, and the power imbalance between China and its individual neighbors is too great,” he said. For that reason, Kaplan says China holds all the cards. Kaplan doesn’t look for Chinese military aggression against other claimants. That, he says, would be counterproductive for its goals in the region. “It would completely undermine its carefully crafted ‘peaceful rise’ thesis and push Southeast Asian countries into closer strategic alignment with the US,” said Kaplan. At the same time, he said Chinese leaders probably will be unable to compromise. “The primordial quest for status still determines the international system, and these bare rocks in the South China Sea have become, in effect, logos of nationhood,” Kaplan said.
  Bangkok (Agenzia Fides) - The Asian Bishops call for "an end to wars and hostilities in the different contexts of Asia", "greater institutional commitment to global peace", "the immediate stop to the trafficking of arms," which helps to steep the continent in blood. As reported to Fides by Fr. Nithiya Sagayam, Ofm Cap, Secretary of the Office for Human Development, within the Federation of the Asian Episcopal Conferences (FABC), the Bishops joined the initiative launched by the FABC Office during the 50th anniversary of Pope John XXIII’s Encyclical, "Pacem in Terris" and in view of "Disarmament Week", sponsored by the UN, while many nations are preparing to sign the Treaty on the Arms Trade, which seeks to limit and regulate the phenomenon. Numerous religious leaders of Asia, including two Cardinals, 20 Archbishops, 10 bishops, as well as another 5,000 representatives of different faiths have joined the appeal, which was sent to Fides Agency, since the text was subsequently extended to other religious communities. The appeal was delivered to the Secretary General of the United Nations, Ban Ki Moon. The document is addressed to world leaders asking them to "work for peace and harmony through disarmament" and "approving the Treaty on arms trade." "Every weapon that is produced is a theft from those who are hungry," he recalls. The arms trade, which has a global turnover of 1,000 billion dollars a year, is a major cause of severe and extensive human rights abuses. Some governments spend more on military expenditure than on social development, communication infrastructure and health care put together. The Bishops point out that the Arms Trade Treaty, which provides control and monitoring mechanisms, "will provide an important contribution to promoting a true culture of peace through responsible collaboration between the states." The arms trade fuels war, causes serious delays in the human development, produces instability and conflict, spreads a culture of violence and crime. The ultimate goal must be disarmament, to avoid violence, death and genocide. (PA) (Agenzia Fides 12/7/2012)
The Asia-Pacific region can be regarded as a zone of both relative insecurity and strategic stability. It contains some of the world’s most significant flashpoints – the Korean peninsula, the Taiwan Strait, the Siachen Glacier – where tensions between nations could escalate to the point of major war. It is replete with unresolved border issues; is a breeding ground for transnational terrorism and the site of many terrorist activities (the Bali bombings, the Manila superferry bombing); and contains overlapping claims for maritime territories (the Spratly Islands, the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands) with considerable actual or potential wealth in resources such as oil, gas and fisheries. Finally, the Asia-Pacific is an area of strategic significance with many key sea lines of communication and important chokepoints. Yet despite all these potential crucibles of conflict, the Asia-Pacific, if not an area of serenity and calm, is certainly more stable than one might expect. To be sure, there are separatist movements and internal struggles, particularly with insurgencies, as in Thailand, the Philippines and Tibet. Since the resolution of the East Timor crisis, however, the region has been relatively free of open armed warfare. Separatism remains a challenge, but the break-up of states is unlikely. Terrorism is a nuisance, but its impact is contained. The North Korean nuclear issue, while not fully resolved, is at least moving toward a conclusion with the likely denuclearisation of the peninsula. Tensions between China and Taiwan, while always just beneath the surface, seem unlikely to erupt in open conflict any time soon, especially given recent Kuomintang Party victories in Taiwan and efforts by Taiwan and China to re-open informal channels of consultation as well as institutional relationships between organisations responsible for cross-strait relations. And while in Asia there is no strong supranational political entity like the European Union, there are many multilateral organisations and international initiatives dedicated to enhancing peace and stability, including the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, the Proliferation Security Initiative and the Shanghai Co-operation Organisation. In Southeast Asia, countries are united in a common geopolitical and economic organisation – the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) – which is dedicated to peaceful economic, social and cultural development, and to the promotion of regional peace and stability. ASEAN has played a key role in conceiving and establishing broader regional institutions such as the East Asian Summit, ASEAN+3 (China, Japan and South Korea) and the ASEAN Regional Forum. All this suggests that war in Asia – while not inconceivable – is unlikely.
In our conference statement from 2012, we recommend that the “role and participation of the Permanent Participants is secured and that mechanisms to increase their financial and human resources to participate fully in all the activities of the Arctic Council” are provided.
WASHINGTON, May 22 (RIA Novosti), Leandra Bernstein – Tense relations between Russia and the US and NATO could potentially be cooled through Arctic cooperation, according to the program director at the George Washington Institute for European, Russian, and Eurasian Studies.
In reality, the ostensible humanitarian justification for the war is secondary at best. It's the underlying perception that European security is threatened that's really driving this military intervention. The United States rarely intervenes militarily when there is no perception that its interests are at stake. So the military operation advertised as a NATO mission to relieve human suffering is actually a ham-handed U.S. attempt to defend perceived American security interests. Those perceived interests flow from the Clinton administration's domino theory of instability and concerns about preserving NATO's credibility. Instead of a fear of communism spreading from country to country, the administration's refurbished domino theory sees "instability" -- unless checked -- spreading and engulfing large parts of Europe. Instability has always existed in the volatile and remote Balkan nations, but it hasn't spread outside the region since 1914. The administration constantly alludes to the specter of World War I. But in the events leading up to that war, two powerful and hostile alliances exploited instability in the region -- a situation much different from the one that exists today. At present, instability in the Balkans has no relationship to American vital interests. And getting into a war to preserve "NATO's credibility" sounds eerily like the "peace with honor" justification that kept the United States bogged down in Vietnam for an extra five years. In Vietnam, over a seven-year period, the average tonnage of bombs dropped per month was almost double that dropped per month during Desert Storm, which was in turn much greater than the tonnage dropped on Serbia and Kosovo during the past month. Seven years of pounding from the air did not dissuade the North Vietnamese from their battle to unify Vietnam (nor did an air onslaught alone persuade Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait). It's doubtful that a few months of far less intense attacks on Serbia will stop the Serbs' nationalistic effort to maintain the unity of Serbia.
The main criterion for evaluating whether or not institutions are relevant in the international system is their capacity to bring and maintain international peace. Applying this approach to the BSR, the logic runs as follows: through interactions and cooperation, the outcome of which is cooperative security, international institutions (NATO in particular) have promoted and maintained peace – conflict-free conditions for the region’s development. This demonstrates that international institutions have had a stabilising effect on inter-state relations, particularly on Russo-Baltic relations. The positive influence of the environment of multilateral security and cooperation in stabilising Russo-Baltic relations has manifested itself many times since the early 1990s, the most notable of them being Soviet troop withdrawal and the NATO enlargement in the region. International institutions, such as NATO and the EU, as well as frameworks of multilateral cooperation, such as the Council of Baltic Sea States (CBSS), the Northern Dimension (ND), the Northern European Initiative (NEI) and E-PINE, – all these mechanisms served to mitigate Russo-Baltic relations by engaging them in regional cooperation.53 This is what is meant by security through interdependence – cooperative security: establishing as many bilateral and multilateral ties as possible and building on very practical initiatives, pooling resources and working together.
By 2030 Russia will be a world power economically, politically and militarily. Its position of authority in the international community will be based on its ability to exploit its vast natural resources. Its aim will obviously be to provide a counterbalance to the US domination of world politics, and with this in mind it will be ready to develop its relations with the EU, China, India and Japan. Its political system will nevertheless possess some of the features of an authoritarian regime. Russia will look on the expansion of NATO as being contrary to its national interests and will oppose Finnish membership. When Finland does join NATO, however, this will not detract from its relations with Russia in any permanent sense. Increased shipping in the Baltic Sea may heighten tension in the area, but a military conflict is unlikely, as it would be to the advantage of all the countries and commercial ac­tors in the region to solve the problems by negotiation.
The government will face some major challenges including boosting private investment, bringing momentum in economic activities, achieving GDP growth at higher rate and containing inflation in the new fiscal year 2014-2015 that begins today amid looming risk of political instability, economists and business leaders said on Monday.¶ Achieving the targets set in the budget documents will be tough even in the normal circumstances as many of the targets are over ambitious, they said.¶ Any political instability which seems inevitable will create tough challenges for the government in implementation of the budget for the year, causing tremendous pressure in the economy, they said.¶ Economists and businessmen on Monday told New Age that maintaining macroeconomic stability through ensuring enough investment in the private sector and restoring momentum in economic activities, achieving revenue collection and export earnings target and containing high inflation would be tough for the government.¶ Ensuring law and order situation in the country particularly ensuring personal safety will also be a major challenge for the government, they said.¶ The budget for the FY 2014-2015 will be implemented from today. The parliament on Sunday passed the budget of Tk 2,50,506 crore with a deficit of Tk 67,552 crore or 5 per cent of the gross domestic product.¶ In the budget, the government has set target of achieving growth at 7.3 per cent and bringing down inflation at 6 per cent.¶ Finance minister AMA Muhith in his budget speech mentioned that favourable weather and political stability were required for achieving growth target and other budgetary assumptions including investment, inflation and export earnings.¶ Opposition alliance led by the Bangladesh National Party has already threatened to launch tough movement against the government after Eid-ul Fitr demanding new national elections.¶ Centre for Policy Dialogue executive director Mostafizur Rahman said that the country needed peaceful environment and political stability to achieve 7 per cent economic growth and more.¶ ‘The country’s economy has some inherent resilience to grow by 5 per cent to 6 per cent. But the government should ensure political stability for economic growth by 7 per cent to 8 per cent,’ he said.¶ All sectors including industrial and agricultural production, services, transportation, export, inflation and investment will directly or indirectly be disrupted if there is any political unrest like hartal and violence in the new fiscal year.¶ Investment including foreign direct investment will be adversely affected as investors will not come up with term investment amid political uncertainties and policy unpredictability, he said adding that foreign investors would also refrain from new investment.¶ Increasing budget implementation capacity is also another requirement to achieve the targets set in the budget which is bigger than the government’s implementation capacity, he said.¶ Mostafiz stressed on ensuring inclusive and discussion-based political culture in the country to avoid further political uncertainties and instability.¶ Bangladesh Bank data showed that the credit growth in the private sector stood at 11.5 per cent in March — much below from the central bank target of 16.5 per cent.¶ In the last fiscal year, the economy grew by 6.12 per cent against the target of 7.2 per cent.¶ Former caretaker government adviser Mirza Azizul Islam said that the targets demonstrated in the budget were over ambitious which would be challenging to achieve even in the normal¶ economic and political circumstances.¶ ‘It will be more challenging for the government to implement the budget in terms of achieving GDP growth rate, implementing annual development programme, containing inflation and achieving revenue collection targets,’ he said.¶ Political instability will disrupt investment, employment generation, revenue collection leading slower economic growth in the country, he apprehended.¶ Former Bangladesh Bank governor Salehuddin Ahmed said improving investment environment, removing political uncertainties, ensuring law and order and good governance in the banking sector were the major challenges for the government.¶ Till now, there is no sign of improvement of business and investment-friendly environment in the country, he mentioned.
While domestic issues continue to dominate the election campaign, the way in which Bangladeshi leaders manage relations with neighboring powers India and China is becoming increasingly important. China is slowly building up ties to Bangladesh and competing with India for dominance in the region. China is Bangladesh’s top supplier of military equipment and biggest trading partner. Trade between Bangladesh and China surpassed $8 billion in 2012. China has pledged to build a deep-sea port at Sonadia Island, off the coast of Cox’s Bazar in southeastern Bangladesh, and expressed interest in establishing a transport link connecting Chittagong in Bangladesh to Kunming in China.¶ Indo–Bangladeshi ties have improved considerably during Sheikh Hasina’s tenure. Trade between the two neighbors is soaring upwards of $5 billion (approximately 10 percent of which represents Bangladeshi exports to India). Indian conglomerates have been awarded major infrastructure projects in Bangladesh, including construction of a $1.6 billion coal-fired power plant. New Delhi has appreciated the Awami League government’s actions against terrorist groups and its crackdowns on insurgents from India that seek shelter in Bangladesh. Indo–Bangladeshi cooperation led to the arrest of several insurgent leaders that had been operating in India’s northeast. Dhaka handed over terrorist suspects to New Delhi, even before the two sides had established an extradition treaty. But their 2,500-mile-long shared border has also been the source of much friction. Bangladesh is resentful of Indian border fencing and several incidents of Indian border security forces killing innocent Bangladeshis.
Weeks after Sheikh Hasina was reelected for her second consecutive term as prime minister, Bangladesh continues to suffer from political instability which undermines the country’s development progress. A month prior to the vote, the nation was in the middle of a political standoff, with various political groups vying for a seat in parliament, and the possibility of a neutral interim government was even considered to dispel parity in the country. All this, and several political assassinations in Dhaka, have led, one way or another, to the country’s development being a victim of political instability. The political unrest is viewed with grave concern by donors, which fear this instability could render development programs ineffective and are slowly reducing funds — World Bank data recently revealed a significant drop in foreign aid commitments, an almost 28 percent slip from $1.6 billion in 2013 to $1.2 billion in 2014. The country’s central bank, on the other hand, said in a report last month that overall foreign aid metrics has generally decreased. The report noted that aid disbursements in the latter half of 2013 decreased by over 31 percent to $557 million from $809 million the previous year. Reforms urgent The Asian Development Bank acknowledges the problem and warns that delays in development projects undermine the country’s development. “Delay in implementation of development projects continues to constrain Bangladesh’s development,” the Manila-based multilateral institution said in its Bangladesh country partnership microsite. Although the regional bank said it remains committed to the development efforts in the South Asian nation, the government needs to do its homework if it truly wants to get back on the road to progress. “Bangladesh needs to develop infrastructure, boost investment, improve the business climate, enhance the efficiency of the finance sector and the capital market, develop skills, and improve governance in order to further grow,” an ADB spokesperson told Devex.
In the case of Bangladesh, the foundation of the present political order was laid by the event of 1971. The political horizon of “the national” conditions the form of political legitimacy and draws the spectrum of partisanship. The dominant form of legitimacy that exists in Bangladesh is correlated with the “Bengali nation”—i.e. the Bengali nation’s right to rule over itself. This form of legitimacy has no determinate dovetailing with the institutionalised regime of the political. If the judiciary, the bureaucracy, and other legally autonomous spheres of political order cannot lay claim to be autonomous agencies and are easily folded under the agency of the ruling regime, this is primarily because of the reason that these institutions cannot appeal to the founding legitimacy in the way the extra-institutional people do. Granted, these institutions have their own logics of operation, and yet they have no agency to assert their political autonomy. Even whatever legitimacy the operation of pastoral power provides to the ruling regime, it is always vulnerable vis-à-vis the claims of the extra-institutional people. In any case, the imbalance of power, I would suggest, has a deeper root than sheer institutional dysfunctionality. The ruling regime is in a position to control and navigate the institutions at the level of decision, if not at the level of institutional logic. The concentration of power in the hand of the ruling regime results in an irresolvable tension within the sphere of political power. At the moment of election – that is, the moment when the power is to be transferred — the systematic absence of an autonomous procedurality and the attendant concentration of power in the ruling regime enter into a sharp contest. The opposition party — along with the civil society and any other actors concerned with a “fair” election — cannot but oppose the occurrence of elections under the aegis of the ruling regime. There are two forms of determinate contest in the political sphere: (i) the apparent and predominant contest between the political parties, who, in their identity and difference, form the political society; (ii) the simultaneous tension between the political and civil societies. The Non-partisan Caretaker Government was a solution that kept the suspended power within the political society with the aim of mitigating the tension between the two main parties. This option has lost its credibility owing to the introduction of the second form of contest following the rupture of the military-backed regime. The military-backed caretaker regime has established that the suspension of political power for the “caretakers” to come into being is not immune to the intrusion of the civil society into the sphere that the political society claims as its own. There is clearly a generalised opposition to the civil society from the partisans of political society. Evidently, both the BNP and the AL are not willing to leave power to a caretaker government that is open to the influence of extra-political-society actors. Thus the BNP came up with another option, that of the “national government”. Clearly, this would be more immune to the risks than what the old model of the caretaker government faced. The problem is there is not enough political force present in the political sphere to make the AL accept this otherwise amenable demand. The political ambition of the ruling party lies in outdoing both the external civil society and the opposition party (internal to political society) by way of rhetorically reducing the opposition party and the civil society to the same level.
Clean, transparent government is a basic tenet of Western political liberalism, so we are naturally inclined to support government reform efforts elsewhere. But in the case of the People’s Republic of China, should we be rooting for Xi Jinping’s version of an anti-corruption campaign to succeed, or to fail, in its intended purposes? Or should we hope it succeeds spectacularly in ways not intended by Communist Party leaders, as glastnost and perestroika did under Mikhail Gorbachev? Xi’s campaign is designed to accomplish multiple Party objectives, none of which necessarily serve Western interests in regional peace and stability. His first goal is to expand and consolidate his personal power over any challengers in China’s political and military bureaucracies. Targeting political rivals as financial miscreants, bribe-takers, or power-abusers is a time-tested way of dealing with them (and not just in China). Would a more powerful and potentially more autocratic Xi be more or less likely to confront the West? Given the aggressive predilections he has demonstrated since taking China’s helm, there is little reason to be sanguine about a further accretion of Xi’s political, and military, power. The broader aim of the current crackdown – as with past efforts – is to refurbish the tarnished image of the CCP and restore some of its lost legitimacy as the moral guardian of the Chinese people. Communist ideology has long ceased to motivate ordinary Chinese, or even many Party leaders. Instead, they rely on economic success – ostensibly distributed fairly across society – and their default position: enhanced military power and virulent nationalism against the United States and Japan. The economic fairness pillar of domestic legitimacy has been crumbling in recent decades. The nation’s remarkable growth in wealth, combined with the CCP’s ongoing monopoly on power and opaque governance, has spawned massive corruption at all levels of political and military authority. Every year, China experiences almost 200,000 public protests against land seizures, environmental degradation, bribery, and other official misconduct. To the extent Xi’s team can clean up the Augean stables of official corruption – or to be seen as seriously trying – they may win at least grudging public approval and thus have less need to play the anti-West, anti-Japan card. The problem with that scenario is that the limited, half-way measures Xi is deploying are exceedingly unlikely to get at the core cause of official corruption. As with all dictatorships, that is the absolute political power wielded by the CCP and the lack of transparency and public accountability that enables and protects the wrongdoers. Moreover, there is little reason to believe that greater public approval of Xi’s rule and a transitory semblance of political legitimacy will moderate the increasingly aggressive foreign policy embodied in his “China dream.” He has made it painfully clear to China’s neighbors that Deng Xiaoping’s days of hiding capabilities and biding time are over. The period of China’s “peaceful rise” has yielded to military muscle-flexing, sweeping regional claims, and aggressive actions not only against smaller, weaker countries, but also against a U.S. now seen as irresolute and faltering, and a Japan clearly divided on the use of military force, despite Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s strong security emphasis. Which brings us to the third major purpose of Xi’s corruption crackdown: the reform and strengthening of China’s military. The People’s Liberation Army has long been riddled with graft and illicit business collusion. In a dramatic demonstration that the PLA will not be immune from the cleanup, the CCP last week expelled Gen. Xu Caihou, former vice chair of the Central Military Commission, the highest military official purged since the Mao era. Since his ascendancy to China’s pinnacle in November 2012, Xi has made further growth of China’s military power a paramount objective of his rule. His first official travel was to key PLA bases where he urged the troops to make ready for “real combat.” He sees military corruption as impeding the PLA’s emergence as a modern, effective fighting force able to execute expanding missions, particularly in the maritime domain. That is not a result the West will welcome. There is an analogy in U.S. policy toward China. Decades of Washington’s obsession with military-to-military engagement provide an object lesson in what a more efficient and effective Chinese military brings us. That officer-to officer interaction was intended (a) to develop greater personal contacts and understanding at all levels of our military establishments in order to avert or manage potential crises; (b) to help “professionalize” the PLA and imbue it with such Western values as subordination to civilian control and respect for the population it is charged with protecting; and (c) to impress Chinese observers with America’s awesome technological capabilities and dissuade them from challenging U.S. military superiority. The well-intentioned U.S. initiative has failed on all three counts: (1) During the EP-3 crisis, America’s ambassador in Beijing tried in vain to reach any of the military contacts he had assiduously cultivated during his stint as head of the Pacific Command. (2) The PLA has indeed become more professional, capable and effective – and more confident in challenging other navies, including the U.S. Seventh Fleet, in the East and South China Seas and the Taiwan Strait. As for subordinating military aspirations to civilian control, yes, the PLA understands the concept, but its loyalty is to the Communist Party, not to the Chinese state or citizenry. It demonstrated that sad reality on June 4, 1989, when the People’s Army turned its guns and tanks on the Chinese people: the students, workers and professionals gathered peacefully in Beijing and cities across China. (3) Far from being awed or intimidated by American technical prowess, the PLA has exploited the close contact to correct its own technological and operational deficiencies. Using know-how freely given by trusting Americans, or stolen from them, China has developed asymmetrical capabilities that have enabled deployment of a serious counter-deterrent strategy of its own. A growing fleet of attack submarines and an expanding arsenal of anti-ship cruise and ballistic missiles now provide China with a credible area denial/anti-access strategy, greatly complicating U.S. planning for contingencies in the Taiwan Strait and elsewhere in East Asia. Given the aggressive ends to which an improved Chinese military will be put, we cannot wish Xi well in his quest to make it more effective. The region was safer with the inferior PLA capable only of defending the homeland rather than projecting Chinese power throughout the region – and with a PLA rife with corruption and inefficiency. The Chinese people, the region and the world will be more secure with a China that undertakes the ultimate clean government project: changing the Communist Party itself and its inherently corrupt monopoly of power. A Chinese government confident in its political legitimacy will not need to fear its own people or whip them into nationalist hostility against conjured foreign threats. It will develop in peace with its neighbors and play a constructive role in a regional and international order that already has immensely benefited modern China. The Chinese people themselves want that kind of country and understand the need for fundamental structural change. They showed that at Tiananmen Square and in the millions of civil protests over the ensuing twenty-five years. Yet many in the West will agree with the Chinese government’s self-serving argument that such fundamental political change will inevitably lead to massive domestic and regional instability. That need not be the case if China’s leaders will openly put the nation on the path to gradual, staged, predictable democratic evolution as Taiwan and other Asians have done. Voice of America and Radio Free Asia should encourage that process in China as VOA and Radio Free Europe did in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe during the Cold War. The risks of stirring political ferment in China and incurring the (further) resentment of its leaders must be weighed against the dangers posed by the course they are presently pursuing, one that is leading inexorably to regional conflict. Until the world is presented with a strong and democratic China, it is better to face a militarily weaker authoritarian China. It is in regional and Western security interests for Xi to fail in his narrow reform goals designed to prepare China for coercion and conflict and instead to pursue a larger, more benign China dream.
A string of unpredictable recent events in China have left China Watchers worldwide wondering what is going on? For a state that prides itself in maintaining “stability” (wei wen) at all costs, the nation seems increasingly unstable and unpredictable. After twenty years of managed leadership successions, steady economic growth, basic social stability, and a generally positive foreign policy—we have recently witnessed unpredictable instability in all these spheres. China watchers ask: Is this the “new normal” in China? If so, policymakers worldwide should start hedging their policies and relationships with China in order to protect their interests and guard against potential fallout. In the political realm, a raft of events has transpired in recent months that collectively indicate that all is not well in the body politic. Most recently, China’s heir-apparent, Xi Jinping, disappeared from public view for two weeks—with no explanation offered to the Chinese public or the world for his absence. Although Mr. Xi has now resurfaced, the totally secretive manner in which the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) dealt with the disappearance flies in the face of its pretensions (under Hu Jintao) to increase “transparency” in party and state affairs. The total silence about the fate of deposed Chongqing party chief and Politburo leader Bo Xilai is also symptomatic of an insecure state. Bo’s wife has been convicted of murder and his former police chief is now on trial for attempting to defect to the United States (and other charges)—but Bo himself still sits incommunicado. While we anticipate charges being publicly levied against him by the CCP’s Central Discipline Inspection Commission in any day now (probably once his ex-police chief is found guilty), the fact that Bo’s case has dragged on for months with no news is another indication that the political system has frozen up. Personalities aside, the CCP’s much-anticipated 18th Party Congress remains in abeyance. While it should be a carefully-scripted and stage-managed event, it has been anything but that. Dates for the Congress, long anticipated for September or October, have not even been announced. Nor has the required prerequisite party plenum taken place. Reports of vicious and protracted factional infighting abound, and speculation of who will be promoted to the inner sanctum of power continues unabated. Something is clearly wrong. This is not the way the CCP normally does business. China’s public and social media are increasingly skeptical of the whole system, and they are more vocally saying so on the vibrant social media networks. Meanwhile, the political uncertainties are compounded by economic uncertainties. The national economy is facing a severe slowdown. Whether 7%, 5%, or possibly even lower GDP growth—the Chinese economy is experiencing its most profound contraction since 1989-1992. The problem is that statistics in China are distorted by the state (at lower as well as higher levels) and nobody really knows the real severity of the downturn. Markets do not like uncertainty, and money is flowing out of the country in significant amounts while foreign investment inflows have also dropped off. Inventories of goods are piling up, as export markets dry up and factories operate at overcapacity. Non-performing loans and bank debts are again building to a serious extent. Local government finances are particularly fraught—estimated by the central government at 11 trillion RMB—or one-quarter of China’s output. Disguised debt makes the problem even bigger. The government has tried stimulus measures ($160 bn. recently announced), but more infrastructure spending is not what China needs. Spending on software, not hardware, is what China needs: social services, financial services, the service sector, and the knowledge economy. In some ways the downturn offers a golden opportunity to undertake the “rebalancing” the government has long talked about, to free up all the pent-up personal savings—but people won’t spend because they are afraid of their futures and hedge against personal uncertainties. Those with excess funds—the middle class—are parking it offshore out of the country in property and foreign bank accounts (a clear indication of the fragility of the CCP and political system). Uncertainties and instabilities are also gripping society. Inflation and unemployment are both on the rise. With the export sector hurting, China’s 120 million migrant labor pool faces fewer opportunities on the coast and are now again “floating” around the interior looking for work. Crime has spiked in several cities. Tibet and Xinjiang remain ethnically restive. And the yawning gap in social equity widens by the day. This adds up to a combustible and unpredictable social situation. Finally, China faces many new uncertainties externally. Its relations with the United States have shown various signs of strain for months. Its relations with Japan have deteriorated sharply over the disputed islands in the East China Sea. Its relationships in Southeast Asia have also been badly battered by its excessive territorial claims in the South China Sea. Ties with Australia and India reveal frictions and mistrust. Public opinion polls elsewhere in the world—in Europe, Africa, and Latin America—all indicate mixed perceptions of China. China’s foreign policy thus faces considerable uncertainties as well. Taken together, this set of Chinese uncertainties adds up to a considerable volatility in the nation’s domestic and global position. After growing accustomed over the past two decades to considerable stability and predictability in and with China, the world had now better be more prepared for greater instabilities and unpredictability. It may be the “new normal.”
India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi met Chinese President Xi Jinping in Fortaleza, Brazil, just before the opening of the BRICS summit there. While the encounter was not particularly path-breaking or unexpected, it established an important rapport between two leaders who will have to work together for some years to come. As my colleague Shannon Tiezzi noted in her report on China Power, the meeting builds on the momentum attained by Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi during his June trip to New Delhi. What is reassuring about the trajectory of India-China relations (if you are one to believe diplomatic rhetoric) is that the leaders of both nations are approaching the entire gamut of strategic issues between the two countries: the trade deficit, border disputes, multilateral organizations, and investment. The underlying assumption is that sustained progress on these issues will ultimately build trust between India and China — a factor that has been somewhat lacking in recent years. As far as bilateral diplomacy goes between China and India, appearances right now are as good as they can be. China wasted little time following the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government’s ascension and the brief dialogue between Modi and Xi in Fortaleza seemingly checked all the boxes. I’ve called China’s overtures towards India since the BJP’s victory an attempt at a “reset” in relations (yes, referring to the failed U.S. initiative towards Russia circa 2009). Nothing witnessed in Fortaleza challenges this, really. If anything, the biggest addition to China’s warm overture toward India is Xi’s invitation for India to attend the APEC Summit for the first time and even potentially ascend to the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. China further invited India to join the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank. Beijing’s reasons for pursuing the reset with India at this time are in part a product of its diplomatic troubles to the east. At the same time, China genuinely does see an opportunity to deepen its relationship with India as it makes a political transition into an era where the erstwhile opposition Hindu nationalists are in near-complete control of the country’s executive and legislative. Should India’s relations with China grow warmer at this point, New Delhi is less likely to cozy up to the United States and Russia (or at least such is the logic for Beijing). However, despite the warmth of the Fortaleza encounter, New Delhi has not entirely abandoned its strategic distrust of Beijing. Modi’s recent trip to Bhutan and the Indian central governments’ novel plans to actively develop the borderlands of Arunachal Pradesh highlight just two recent BJP actions that suggest the era of China paranoia is far from over in India.
Exactly a century ago, on June 28, 1914, the assassination of the archduke of the Austro-Hungarian empire in Sarajevo triggered World War I. In Asia, the rise of China and territorial disputes between China and its neighbours have raised concerns that Europe's past could become Asia's future. The Economist has warned that in East Asia "disputes about clumps of rock could become as significant as the assassination of an archduke". Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has compared current China-Japan tensions with the German-British rivalry before World War I. American philosopher George Santayana wrote: "Those who fail to learn from history are condemned to repeat it." But the use of historical analogies can be deceptive unless one recognises what has changed as much as what has not. Let's consider six main differences between Europe of 1914 and Asia of 2014. First, Europe in 1914 was multipolar; the world in 2014 is better described as a multiplex — that is, multiple great powers bound together by complex forms of restraint and interdependence. Some argue that interdependence among European powers did little to prevent World War I. But European economic interdependence in 1914 was narrow and regional; today's interdependence is broader, deeper and global in scope. Intra-Asian interdependence today is based not only on trade (which is now more than half of Asia's total trade), but also on production networks, finance and investments. US-China economic ties are marked by the financial equivalent of the Cold War's Mutually Assured Destruction (MAD) situation. Massive Chinese holdings of US treasury bonds (amounting to $1.317 trillion in November 2013, or one-third of China's total foreign exchange reserves) not only finances US debt, but ensures that any precipitate Chinese withdrawal of those will seriously devalue its currency and wealth. A major reason for World War I was the attempt by a rising Germany to achieve hegemony. A multiplex world, as in a multiplex theatre, has multiple actors and directors — powers, international organisations, multinational corporations; transnational activists and terrorist networks (the villains), making it difficult and unlikely (more so than in a simple multipolar world) for any single power like China to achieve hegemony, which might be a trigger for war. A second difference has to do with nuclear weapons. They did not exist in 1914. Because of their enormous destructive power, nuclear weapons are a major factor in discouraging war among great powers. Third, the world in 1914 was rife with competition for overseas colonies among the great powers. This contributed in no small measure to the First World War. There is no such colonial competition today. Fourth, in the society and politics of Europe in 1914 there was a strong and widely held belief that war was necessary to maintain stability and balance of power. As Bismarck put it in his famous "iron and blood" speech to the Prussian parliament in 1862, "After all, war is, properly speaking, the natural condition of humanity." Today such beliefs about the necessity of war, like war itself, are much harder to find. Fifth, in 1914 there were very few institutions in Europe, or the world at large, to control geopolitical rivalry. The European Concert of Powers created in the aftermath of the Napoleonic wars had withered away. In 2014, there are multiple global and regional institutions. Asian institutions such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations are criticised for not doing enough to resolve the region's disputes, but they do provide channels of communication and develop principles of conduct to constrain the use of force. A sixth difference involves the nature of governments. In a 2013 speech, then Stanford University president David Starr Jordan feared that "some half-crazed archduke or some harassed minister of state" might start a war in Europe. Today, Asia's leaders base their legitimacy primarily on economic growth which will be seriously harmed if war breaks out. However one might judge China's leaders today, they are not guided by impulsive adventurism without regard for the severe consequences of using military confrontation. Neither do they see war as a natural condition or necessary means for China to attain great power status.
The 21st century will be defined by the relationship between the American superpower and rising China. A new Cold War would threaten the world order while a mutually beneficial association could bring all prosperity. The latter scenario is more likely. The geography, economies, and energy resources of the US and China align their “core interests.” First, geography. The US is located on the most resource and capital-rich continent, North America. The American Midwest consists of valuable arable land and is bisected by the world’s largest navigable rivers, allowing the export of food and products at bargain prices. Nearby nations have either historically been on friendly terms (Canada) or lack the ability to present a threat (Central America and the Caribbean) without an external sponsor. This benign environment has allowed America to focus on projecting power and dominating global merchant marine traffic. Since China lies across an ocean dominated by the American Navy, neither directly threatens the other. China, meanwhile, is a populous and vast land power with a long coastline. Yet China’s focus has historically turned inward, with only sporadic efforts to build a naval presence. China’s heartland is exposed to Russia from the north, Japan to the east, various fractious states to the west, and the rising powers of Thailand, India, and Vietnam to the south. In other words, China is surrounded, and its biggest threats are from other land-based powers, particularly Russia and India. China therefore cannot afford to antagonize America, since it would require American support or tacit neutrality in any conflict with Russia or India. Geography ensures that China does not see American naval dominance on its shores as a comparable threat. A Chinese move against American interests would open it to aggression from its neighbors while simultaneously cutting off a needed ally. No Chinese go–vernment is foolish enough to risk multiple high-intensity wars. The geography of China and the US dictate their “core interests” as mutually non-threatening states, and make cooperation more likely since both have an interest in opposing Russia. Secondly, the American and Chinese economies are destined to become more interdependent, and integrated economies usually lead to geostrategic alliances. The US follows a laissez-faire economic model, entailing a boom-and-bust cycle that is harsher than in more planned systems. When the free market dictates economic ap–portionment, at the height of the cycle resources are often applied to unwise projects. During recessions, companies either downsize or go out of business, resulting in short spurts of high unemployment. America tolerates these fluctuations because she long ago decided to trade economic stability for higher long-term growth. This has succeeded over the past century. This growth, combined with other advantages, ensures the US will endure as a superpower. America utilizes its advantages to maintain a global maritime “trade order” in the form of organizations like the World Bank, International Mone–tary Fund, and World Trade Organization, resulting in economic growth for the world and a successful consumption-based economy at home. Contrastingly, China’s economy is a sort of “state capitalism” distinct from the European “state champion” model. The economy is based around exporting finished manufactured goods to America, further integrating both economies. China’s two-de–cade-plus surge in economic growth will soon end, yet given the lack of progress in transitioning to a more con–sumption-based economy, China has not achieved what its large population considers an equitable distribution of resources and benefits. Such imbalances foster domestic tensions. The growth constraints facing China’s economy will only create additional problems with fewer new resources at Beijing’s disposal. The Chinese slowdown has already led to political in–fighting, and this is likely to continue in the future. Addressing this problem while transitioning to a consumption-based economy may reduce the ability of the ruling Communist Party to project power abroad while retaining it at home. Complementation Economically, America is strong in areas like food production, edu–cation, technology, and precision industrial manufacturing. China, by contrast, is strong in areas like heavy industry, light manufacturing, and cheap labor. This presents a recipe for complementary econo-mic interdependence. Finally, both countries will move closer geopolitically because of their complementary energy interests. Most of China’s foreign policy centers on attempts to acquire new energy resources, particularly oil. Over the following decades, China will seek to become more self-sufficient by expanding its hydropower capacity and coal plants. America shares this goal, and with the shale revolution will likely end up exporting energy to China, including oil and liquid natural gas. This gives America a geopolitical “lever” over China by increasing economic interdependence. The American situation on energy resources, particularly oil and natural gas, outclasses China’s. Oil is non-renewable, and members of the Organization or Petroleum Exporting Countries will likely be unable to meet China’s growing demand. However, America now controls the world’s largest untapped oil reserve, the Green River Formation. This formation alone contains up to 3 trillion barrels of untapped oil-shale, roughly half of which may be recoverable. This single geologic formation could contain more oil than the rest of the world’s proven reserves combined. As Chinese demand rises, Beijing will likely become the top importer of this oil. No other oil source can supply China’s needs as efficiently. Eastern European and Russian oil shale reserves are smaller and less politically and economically extractable than America’s emerging sources. If America invests a comparatively small portion of its new energy-based wealth into a larger Navy to secure a Pacific trade route to China, the economic integration of the two nations will be virtually irreversible. Already, foreign investments are pouring into the “new Middle East” of America and Canada, despite strong opposition from the current administration. American control over future markets for natural gas is almost as certain as for oil. The US produces natural gas abundantly and is building the facilities to export it to foreign markets, including China. China imports roughly 56 percent of its oil and this number grows each year. Beijing plans to increase reserves by acquiring new offshore resources and “secure” reserves abroad. Since between 60 percent to 70 percent of its imported oil originates in Africa or the Middle East, the only way to inexpensively transport it is by sea. This makes China vulnerable to economic warfare from India, which can severe much of its supply at will. This is a strategic concern and makes war with India more likely. China doesn’t have many other domestic energy options with the exception of coal, which carries high health and environmental risks. Renewable energy is too expensive, hydraulic power creates instability in rural areas, and social biases prohibit nuclear power. For technical reasons, China’s untapped oil shale reserves, though large, would be prohi–bitively expensive to process. They are estimated to be economically recoverable at $345 a barrel, more than triple the price of American oil shale. An American boom in natural gas cannot fully “bail out” China; nonetheless it will certainly be part of the solution. Domestic political pressures, environmental concerns and rising demand for portable fuels mean the crux of Chinese foreign policy for the foreseeable future will be aimed at acquiring new oil supplies and protecting existing supply lines across the Indian Ocean. The South China Sea is critical to China’s goals because most imported oil from Africa must cross it, and the sea contains its own marginal reserves close to China. Inadequate naval forces guarantee China will continue to depend upon the American Navy to protect its oil trade. The dispute surrounding the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands does not change that. In any case, heightened regional competition for energy assets will diminish as American reserves come online over the next five to ten years. In the energy sector, America will ultimately transition to an energy and fuel exporter and China will ultimately import American resources. This will further connect their economies and build strong economic ties. Both China and America hope for a mutually beneficial arrangement to meet their security and de–velopment goals. Geographic, economic, and energy consi–derations ensure these two nations will become more interdependent throughout this century.
The paramount question looming over twenty-first century international politics is: will the United States and China get along? Most national-security experts express guarded optimism. Although rising powers have historically clashed with their established rivals—adopting revisionist foreign policies to secure more influence, territory, or status—this time, people say, is different. China is a major stakeholder in the current economic order and has no reason to overthrow the very system that has allowed it to grow rich and powerful. The regional maritime disputes that do exist —over small uninhabitable islets—may arouse emotions but do not demonstrate a deep revisionist streak in Beijing. In short, a status quo Washington and a status quo Beijing need not clash.
But the crucial fact is that the public on each side does not have any appetite for a sustained conflict.¶ Attention has focused on the key leaders — President Barack Obama, Russian President Vladimir Putin, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and German Chancellor Angela Merkel. Putin has used his acts of aggression to build public support. Yet the focus should be on whether the Russian people want renewed confrontation — or would even countenance something like a “new Cold War.”¶ Russia may not be a democracy, but it is also not the totalitarian Soviet Union. The flip side of Putin’s brand of authoritarian populism is his reliance on public opinion to maintain legitimacy.¶ Putin’s popularity ratings have soared from roughly 50 percent to more than 80 percent since the annexation of Crimea, and his domestic opposition has been effectively muted. The less educated, more conservative and nationalistic segments of the Russian public have enthusiastically bought into his attacks on the West for ignoring or threatening Russia’s strategic interests.¶ More than half of all Russians, according to the polling agency VCIOM, now agree that relations with the West “can only be tense and be based on distrust.” Nor is this a new phenomenon — eastward expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Western support for Kosovo independence and the “color revolutions” throughout the post-Soviet periphery all heightened Russians’ sense that the West was taking advantage of their weakness.¶ Popular support for translating this anti-Western resentment into a sustained confrontation, however, appears shallow at best. Though another Russian polling agency, the Levada Center, reports negative attitudes toward the United States at a 20-year high, both Levada and VCIOM confirm that nearly two-thirds of Russians view isolation from the West as unlikely or impossible.¶ In addition, despite strong opposition to the new Western-backed government in Ukraine, most Russians oppose further military intervention there, even while they support diplomatic and economic assistance for Russian speakers in the region. Russian troops are still present near Ukraine’s eastern border, but Putin has clearly backed off from a full-scale invasion — likely calculating that the Russian public would not tolerate the high costs of a prolonged and bloody conflict in Ukraine.¶ If the current ceasefire fails and leads to greater bloodshed, Russian public opinion could still shift in favor of intervention. For now, however, Russians expect more from their leaders to sustain health, pension and education investments, deliver concrete progress on the economic modernization agenda and stem the brain drain and capital flight that are weighing down economic growth.¶ Additional punitive sanctions from the West, especially on Russia’s revenue-generating energy and natural resource exports, would make these tasks far harder. So Putin has strong incentives to quit escalating confrontation and focus on consolidating his early gains.¶ Fortunately for the Kremlin, there is also little appetite on the Western side for deepening the conflict. Europeans are largely interested in preventing the unraveling of their main accomplishment since World War II — the economic growth, stability, and democratization brought about through European Union integration.¶ Though the annexation of Crimea has restored enthusiasm for a robust NATO alliance, in the last EU parliamentary elections voters rejected calls for increased military spending. European businesses are also not ready to sever extensive economic ties with Russia.¶ For their part, Americans are confronting a bevy of difficult foreign-policy issues — chaos in Iraq, China’s rise and nuclear negotiations with Iran. Putin and Russia provide fodder for campaign trail bombast or cable news talk shows, but neo-containment is not a high priority for either the U.S. public or their elected leaders.¶ If there is a silver lining in the current Ukraine crisis, it is that the public on all sides are not enthusiastic for a “new Cold War.” This does not provide a blueprint for starting to restore relations but it means there may be a ceiling to the mutual hostility and distrust.
They could also suggest Putin is not about to replay in eastern Ukraine the sequence of events that led to Russia's annexation of Crimea in March and that he is intent on de-escalating the crisis to avert the risk of new Western sanctions and reduce the threat of instability on Russia's border.¶ In the past few weeks, he has withdrawn most troops massed near the frontier, asked parliament to cancel a resolution approving the use of military force in Ukraine and engaged in diplomacy with the West. Moscow has also signalled a willingness to allow stronger controls at the border, through which Ukraine says the rebels have received military supplies.¶ Barring a dramatic turn back towards armed intervention by Russia, Putin's goal appears to be to find a way to reduce tension in Ukraine without losing face or popularity.¶ "As a result of four months of aggression in Ukraine, Putin found himself at a fateful fork in the road," former Kremlin adviser Andrei Illarionov wrote in a blog posted on the website of liberal Russian radio station Ekho Moskvy on Saturday.¶ Abandoning the rebels risks a loss of support and could fuel opposition to Putin in Russia, he said, but the other choice - sending in the armed forces - would lead to an inevitable confrontation with the West.¶ Putin's popularity has risen to new highs over his handling of the Ukraine crisis, in which the toppling of a president sympathetic to Moscow threatened in February to end Russia's ability to influence events in a country it long dominated.¶ The reclaiming of Crimea in March stirred patriotism and won Putin almost unanimous praise at home, though the rebellion that followed in eastern Ukraine raised fears in the West that Moscow was about to send in troops, despite his denials that Moscow was orchestrating the uprising and supporting it militarily.¶ Putin reiterated in a speech to Russian ambassadors gathered in Moscow last week that he reserved the right to protect Russian speakers abroad by "using the entire range of available means — from political and economic to operations under international humanitarian law and the right of self-defence."¶ But he has signaled repeatedly that he wants to reduce tensions - even though he may wish to keep them simmering just enough to unsettle Ukraine's pro-western leadership.¶ Loath as he is to say it, Russia is increasingly worried that sanctions could inflict serious damage on its $2 trillion economy, which is already heading towards recession, potentially denting Putin's popularity.¶ The reduction in tensions so far has helped strengthen the rouble and Russian shares, which rose last week to eight-month highs before slipping back.¶ This makes it no surprise that he had by late Monday made no public comment on the fall of Slaviansk, while Foreign Ministry remarks and state media coverage focused on humanitarian problems and the ferocity of the government forces' onslaught.¶ Russia also sent a positive sign on its commitment to talks at the weekend by attending the latest meeting on ending the violence under the auspices of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).¶ GOALS ACHIEVED?¶ Putin could have another reason for de-escalation; he may already have achieved all he can in Ukraine, at least for now.¶ He may be gambling that what is already on offer from Kiev could be enough to satisfy the nationalist sentiment he has unleashed in Russia but could yet struggle to contain.
“We are not going to be getting into a military excursion in Ukraine,” the president said in an interview with NBC’s San Diego affiliate, KNSD, one of several he did Wednesday. “What we are going to do is mobilize all of our diplomatic resources to make sure that we’ve got a strong international coalition that sends a clear message, which is that Ukraine should decide their destiny.” …¶ Obama said that he sees Russian President Vladimir Putin acting “out of weakness, not out of strength” in attempting to take control of Crimea. Putin, the president said, is “not comfortable” with former members of the Soviet Union making moves to align themselves with the West.¶ In another interview, with St. Louis NBC affiliate KSDK, Obama also said that a military option is not on the table.¶ “Obviously, you know, we do not need to trigger an actual war with Russia,” he said. “The Ukrainians don’t want that. Nobody would want that.”¶ Politifact would rate this as true, because literally no one wants that. That’s not a Bidenesque literally, but a literal literally. No one wants it, no one would approve it, and for a couple of really good reasons — we have no national interest in who governs Crimea, and an attempt to start a war there would make Dieppe look well-considered. It’s in the Russian’s back yard.¶   So why bother saying it at all? That’s the curious aspect of this. Obama has an annoying habit of attempting to present his critics’ arguments in his own fantasy reductio ad absurdum constructs that end up bearing no resemblance to the actual criticisms, all to paint himself as the voice of centrist reason. This, however, just makes him look as out of touch as the rest of his foreign policy — with an extra added dollop of weakness as the a la mode touch.¶ Paul Mirengoff calls this a “false choice,” and a bad signal to send:¶ In ruling out military action, Obama explained that “the Ukrainians don’t want [an actual war with Russia], nobody would want that.” But if Russia continues to devour their country, the Ukrainians are no less likely to want a war than any of Russia’s other neighbors or former client states would be under similar circumstances.¶ Accordingly, Obama’s statement can be read by Russia as ruling out any U.S. military to stop any future aggression within the former Soviet Union and perhaps within its entire former sphere of influence. Perhaps Obama would have been better advised not to have made this statement.¶ The other problem with the statement is that, to use Obama’s former pet phrase, it presents us with a false choice. America’s options aren’t limited to taking military action and “mobilizing diplomatic resources to send a clear message.”¶ We could, for example, provide weapons and ammunition to Ukraine. Ukraine could then decide whether to use them in the event of further Russian aggression. Ukraine has, in fact, requested weapons and ammunition, but Obama turned down the request.¶ I suspect we have not supplied Ukraine with weapons because we want to diminish the prospect of Ukrainian resistance in the event Russia moves into Eastern Ukraine (which Russia seems at least as likely as not to do). Ukrainian resistance is not in Obama’s interest, as he likely sees it, because the resulting bloodbath would further embarrass his administration.¶ And that question may become acute quickly. NATO’s top concern at the moment is that Vladimir Putin won’t stop at Crimea, Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen told Foreign Policy’s Yochi Dreazen:¶ NATO’s top official acknowledged in an interview that Russia’s annexation of Crimea had “established certain facts on the ground” that would be difficult to change and said the military alliance was increasingly concerned that Moscow might also invade eastern Ukraine.
So, if you look back at the 25 years that we have of cyber conflict, so, we avoid the word war for many of the same reasons that Thomas does, but we can still say, look, we’ve been having these things that are understandable as national security conflicts since 1986, and that includes everything from espionage to some of the things that Thomas describes as sabotage, to high-end attacks that don’t cross into war. We still don’t see that anybody has ever died from a cyber attack. So, I absolutely agree with Thomas that it’s an odd kind of war that’s never had a single casualty, but there is this conflict that’s happening at the technology level with these very strong national security implications that we can take a look at and that we can learn from, and most importantly, can help us understand what might be happening next, because Thomas has been great at underlying this point and saying, the discussion on this has been very flat. There hasn’t been much thought about what we mean by war, about what kinds of war. Frankly, we’re continuing to be pulled back by people talking about the digital Pearl Harbor, and we realized in this book, we’ve been 14 talking about digital Pearl Harbors for 20 of the 70 years since the actual Pearl Harbor. So, there’s obviously some kind of dynamic going on that we’re not understanding if we’re getting that wrong so much. I’ll cover just some of the main lessons that we’ve been looking at and that we’ve found when we looked at cyber conflict as history. Most importantly, you can learn from the history. There actually is a history that you can take from. Many of our colleagues that speak on this topic you’ll hear say, the only constant is change and it’s moving so quickly. That’s true at the technology level, but so what? If you look at it as a national security conflict, the kinds of dynamics have been relatively the same since 1986. Just like you could take a fighter pilot from 1916 and a fighter pilot today, and even though the technologies come so much more lethal and the battles are taking place at faster speeds over wider rangers, they’re still going to be zooming in and shooting each others’ fighters down and talking about some guy on a six, because the fundamental dynamics of fighting in the air haven’t changed that much and the same thing is true here. Also, we find that the more strategically significant the cyber conflict, the more similar it is to conflict in the air, land and sea. So, I’ll say that again. The more strategically significant the cyber conflict, the more 15 similar it is, and that also is like conflict -- if you hear many of the American generals today that are involved in cyber, they’ll tell you about how it’s speed of light and how two kids in their basement can have capabilities and deterrence is tough, and all of those things are true at the tactical level, but since when do we want our Four-Star Generals talking about fighting from -- the truths of fighting in foxholes? The generals should be looking to abstract up what’s true at the tactical level to what’s up at the strategic level. For example, speed of light, you hear General Alexander talk about how cyber is speed of light all the time. It is true, but I came from the Air Force, I see many others here. In the Air Force, the dogfight could be over before you even know you’re in a dogfight, but air campaigns take place over weeks, months, and years, and that’s what we see in cyber. A single cyber attack has almost never had -- a speed of light cyber attack has almost never had strategic consequences. It’s almost always a back and forth between adversaries that unfolds over days, months, years. Likewise, warning tends to be very simple for cyber attacks. That’s not what you hear from the Ft. Meade crowd. You hear that it’s very difficult because it’s speed of light, but the largest attacks take place in a geopolitical context, that you don’t get attacked out of the blue, you get attacked when one nation is -- one national rival is angry at 16 another national rival, which makes warning a lot easier. It also generally takes attribution off the table because in almost all of the cyber conflicts that we’ve looked at over the past 25 years -- disruptive cyber conflicts -- it’s been pretty obvious who’s been doing the attacking, which I think has great implications for deterrence and what kinds of conflicts we might see next.
I don’t see myself in the business of speculation. The fact is, we’ve never seen a single blackout -- electricity blackout caused by a cyber attack. We’ve seen people try. Certainly it’s theoretically possible, but we’ve never seen it in practice. Or, for instance, we’ve never seen a single person killed or injured as a result of a cyber attack. In fact, the single only external cyber attack that has ever caused physical damage to a machine was Stuxnet. All other control system incidents that had a kinetic effect were insider attacks, which is a 8 different story. So, what does that mean? That means we have to be able to answer the question, why? We can’t just ignore the question, why has nothing happened yet, and I think we see a strange combination of two main actors. One, those with the intention to do harm, haven’t got the motivation to do so, because I assume that some people would be able to use that as a tool, and those with the motivation to do harm, don’t have the capability to do so. That may change at some point in the future, but -- and once that happens, then of course there’s going to be more chance of uncertainty and friction, but I would be hesitant to speculate more than that. MR. SINGER: What would chance, friction, the fog of war, look like in this space? MR. HEALEY: It’s very deep. I mean, the uncertainty in this field is far more than I would say in warfare in the other domains, starting, not least, that you’ve -- and two of the biggest differences of conflict in this domain isn’t speed, isn’t that the borders are kind of funny, isn’t difficulty of attribution, all the other things that get quoted, it’s that it’s owned, run, and operated by the private sector for their own purposes. In all the conflict in the other domains, civilians would try and get out of the battlefield if they 9 can. Here they’ve built everything within it, almost everything within it, for their own purposes. There’s uncertainty in the effects of your weapons, there’s uncertainty in the targeting of your weapons, there’s uncertainty in you can develop this whole capability and if they’ve got backup tapes, then your whole plan is ruined. So, there’s far more uncertainty in this conflict in cyberspace than in other places. I liked -- I agree with the bits that Thomas has just said. I’d go a touch further in that -- because I want to say how this is similar to the other domains. I mean, we’ve come up with some things that make it different like the role of the private sector, but if you’re in the military, the Air Force, you knew you can’t just bomb a factory or bomb a runway because they’re going to come back and they’re going to fix it. This is why AWPD was so wrong and so much of our World War II planning was wrong, because after you bomb something, they fix it. And when we look at cyber conflict, we know it’s easy to take something down, it’s extremely easy in cyberspace to take a target down. It’s very difficult to keep it down over time. Even Stuxnet, I mean, that was a back and forth over months, years, of back and forth to keep down the centrifuges. Shamoon. General Alexander loves to talk about how the Iranians took down 30,000 computers, essentially turned them into 0 paperweights, at Saudi Aramco. But you know what? They took down 30 computers, but the computers got replaced and supposedly the Iranians were trying to do this to disrupt oil production, and they didn’t. So, General Alexander says this as, oh, my gosh, this is a terrible story. I see it as a defeat because if they were doing it to disrupt oil production and they failed, then we shouldn’t be talking that they destroyed 30,000 computers, we should be talking about they failed in their strategic objective. MR. SINGER: So, Jay, doesn’t this in some ways, though, counter your previous call to use this in Syria? Because we heard from these two that the reasons not to use it in Syria was, to use another bad metaphor, essentially if you’re a coach of a football team, you don’t use the trick play on Middle Eastern State University, you save it for the big game out East. And then you said, but I want to use it to actually show that there’s a new norm, that we can carry out these operations, sort of open up a new space of what’s viable. But you’re just -- the counter to this would be, couldn’t, one, the Syrian regime could say, goodness, you’ve started -- opened up a new realm of war in our operation, but the second is, aha, we defeated you. You turned off your computers for a day and now we’ve got them back on. Would we be handing them an easy win? MR. HEALEY: There’s two answers to the question, it’s a great question. One is to use cyber, remember, it’s very difficult to keep things down. I don’t think we’re going to be able to keep the air defenses down, power down, command and control down, for more than a couple of hours, maybe a day or two at most, so it’s to open up a window so that we can do conventional military strikes rather than a substitute for. I don’t think our capabilities are there to really keep it down for a long period. That takes a lot of effort. I see it much more as just opening a window so that we can do our regular kinetic things. MR. SINGER: Basically just do Operation Orchard, which the Israelis did. MR. HEALEY: Correct. Second is, we’ve already put the war fighting norms out there and then we got caught doing it. We tried to say that some of the -- that what China was doing for espionage was completely beyond the pale, but somehow what we were doing with Stuxnet was okay. That was always a tough argument to make, that Chinese espionage was just far too much, but our actually destroying stuff, that’s cool. And now that we’ve also got caught with espionage, we’re already seen to be the war makers. We’re already seen to be the worst even though I would -- there’s -- I’m not saying we are. So, all I’m saying with Syria is, let’s at least maybe show that this can be done in a humanitarian way, not just -- 2 MR. SINGER: Okay. Ian, you wanted -- MR. WALLACE: Yeah, I just want to say I think the reasons why we haven’t seen any massive cyber physical attack, particularly against the United States and her allies is because the United States is the biggest military power in the world and, you know, there is a deterrence effect that comes from that. What instead I think you see is people who are, to date at least, calculating how they can poke Uncle Sam in a way that doesn’t provoke enough of a reaction to get a, either military or in some senses any other kind of response, back at them.
Xi, opening the two-day annual talks in Beijing, said problems in bilateral ties are not to be afraid of as long as both sides work to solve them.
BEIJING: Confrontation between China and the United States would be a disaster and both must respect each others' sovereignty, Chinese President Xi Jinping said on Wednesday as he opened annual talks between the world's two biggest economies.
ASEAN diplomatic sources told Kyodo News on Tuesday that at the 47th ASEAN Foreign Ministers Meeting scheduled to be held next month in Myanmar's administrative capital Naypyitaw, the foreign ministers will touch on territorial disputes in the South China Sea and the East China Sea.
Shale gas production has skyrocketed in recent years thanks to advances in fracking, which involves injecting a cocktail of water, sand and chemicals into the ground to extract fuel. Nice Washington Post piece on Saturday about how the “center of gravity” in global oil exploration and production is shifting to the Western hemisphere. No, the bulk of global conventional oil reserves still sits in the Persian Gulf, but the larger point is worth exploring: we no longer project global futures where East and West logically fight over Middle East energy reserves. Those expected long-term dynamics are collapsing right now before our eyes. It’s not just the new conventional oil finds in the Americas, but the lifting of unconventional reserves (so-called tight oil). Then there’s the “fracking revolution” in natural gas that favors the Western Hemisphere in a big, big way, because four of the top seven reserves in the world (U.S., Argentina, Mexico, Canada) are found here. The fracking revolution kicks off two additional mini-revolutions in energy: the accelerated shift to natural gas-powered vehicles, reducing the oil demand even further, and the displacement of coal in electricity generation frees up the cleanest and most high-quality coal in the world for export to Asia, where electricity demand is skyrocketing. So here’s the geo-strategic reality shaping up: the Western Hemisphere doesn’t need the Persian Gulf, which is source #5 to the U.S. market, after the U.S. itself, North America, South America and Africa. But not only is the U.S. increasingly less worried about the Persian Gulf and more willing — logically — to let that become Asia’s problem to manage (it’s their oil after all, as more than half of it heads their way now, and that percentage will only grow), it also becomes a trusted and important energy supplier to Asia (liquid natural gas and coal over time). Toss in China’s growing food reliance on the Western Hemisphere, which only grows with that nation’s middle class, and the climate change that makes it harder to grow food over there, and we’re looking at a global future in which China and the U.S. are intertwined in basic resource dependencies: they need our food and energy, and we need their savings. Those realities are already firmly in place: the Western hemisphere largely feeds the Eastern one in terms of major grain flows (reflecting underlying water-resource realities), and Asia has been the primary saver in the global financial system for several decades now. So no, there is no civilizational fight over the Middle East. All that imagined nonsense falls by the wayside. Likewise, the “strategic pivot” pursued by the U.S. today is a complete whiff in strategic terms. Globalization has already “conquered” East Asia, creating the vast and inescapable interdependencies described here. That “battle,” however you want to describe it, is already over. Don’t feel bad by any of this. I like my military types to be a bit slower – strategic awareness-wise – than my politicians (just consider the reverse), and I like my politicians to be a good step behind my business types. They’ll all get the message soon enough. Because this future is staring them in the face.
It's hard to imagine a scarier world than the one Michael Klare predicts in his May 1 commentary in the Nation. Global resources are dwindling and demand for them is exploding; desperate for control, the world's major industrial powers are gearing up for a violent resource war. We may be getting along fine with China and Russia for now, but we're also vying with them for control of resources in poor, unstable nations -- what happens when we have to pick sides of a bloody internal conflict? Does it make you feel better that the U.S. Defense Department has "undertaken a massive modernization of the combat fleet...an endeavor that could take decades to complete and consume hundreds of billions of dollars"? Klare has a better idea, and thank goodness, because by the time he finally rolled it out, I was beginning to lose faith in the future: It is essential that America reverse the militarization of its dependence on imported energy and ease geopolitical competition with China and Russia over control of foreign resources. Because this would require greater investment in energy alternatives, it would also lead to an improved energy economy at home (with lower prices in the long run) and a better chance at overcoming global warming. Any strategy aimed at reducing reliance on imported energy, especially oil, must include a huge increase in spending on alternative fuels, especially renewable sources of energy (solar and wind), second-generation biofuels (those made from nonedible plant matter), coal gasification with carbon capture and burial (so that no carbon dioxide escapes into the atmosphere to heat the planet) and hydrogen fuel cells, along with high-speed rail, public transit and other advanced transportation systems. The science and technology for these advances is already largely in place, but the funding to move them from the lab or pilot-project stage to full-scale development is not. The challenge, then, is to assemble the many billions--even trillions--of dollars that will be needed. The principal obstacle to this herculean task is the very reason for its necessity in the first place: massive spending on the military dimensions of overseas resource competition. I estimate that it costs approximately $100 billion to $150 billion per year to enforce the Carter Doctrine, not including the war in Iraq. Extending that doctrine to the Caspian Sea basin and Africa will add billions. A new cold war with China, with an accompanying naval arms race, will require trillions in additional military expenditures over the next few decades. This is sheer lunacy: it will not guarantee access to more sources of energy, lower the cost of gasoline at home or discourage China from seeking new energy resources. What it will do is sop up all the money we need to develop alternative energy sources and avert the worst effects of global climate change. And this leads to a final recommendation: rather than engage in militarized competition with China, we should cooperate with Beijing in developing alternative energy sources and more efficient transportation systems. The arguments in favor of collaboration are overwhelming: together, we are projected to consume 35 percent of the world's oil supply by 2025, most of which will have to be imported from dysfunctional states. If, as is widely predicted, global oil reserves have begun to shrink by then, both of our countries could be locked in a dangerous struggle for dwindling supplies in chronically unstable areas of the world. The costs, in terms of rising military outlays and the inability to invest in more worthwhile social, economic and environmental endeavors, would be staggering. Far better to forswear this sort of competition and work together on the development of advanced petroleum alternatives, super-fuel-efficient vehicles and other energy innovations. Many American and Chinese universities and corporations have already initiated joint ventures of this sort, so it is not hard to envision a much grander regime of cooperation. As   we approach the 2008 elections, two paths lie before us. One leads to greater reliance on imported fuels, increased militarization of our foreign fuel dependency and prolonged struggle with other powers for control over the world's remaining supplies of fossil fuels. The other leads toward diminished reliance on petroleum as a main source of our fuel, the rapid development of energy alternatives, a reduced US military profile abroad and cooperation with China in the development of innovative energy options. Rarely has a policy choice been as stark or as momentous for the future of our country.
Introduction While the European Union (EU) has long been the most developed model of regional integration, it was severely shaken by the recent economic crisis, causing increasing doubts about the integration process. The lack of a timely and coherent response to the euro crisis called into question the integrity of the eurozone, whose structural and institutional fault lines have been revealed by the financial crisis. These doubts coincide with dramatic changes in the global economic order involving the relative decline of the EU and United States and the rise of Asia. The likely economic adjustments are already threatening social cohesion and political stability in Europe. The crisis has temporarily weakened the EU's status as a model for regional integration, but as the EU recovers its confidence, as it always has after previous crises, it will continue to be the leading example for other efforts at regional integration. The EU Model Since the early 1950s, the EU has been a pioneer in regional integration. The most important principles underlying the success of the EU project include: – Visionary politicians, such as Robert Schuman of France and Konrad Adenauer of Germany, who conceived of a new form of politics based on the supranational "community method" rather than the traditional balance-of-power model. Support from the United States was also crucial in the early years. – Leadership generated by the Franco-German axis. Despite many problems, Paris and Berlin have been and remain the driving force behind European integration. – The political will to share sovereignty and construct strong, legally based, common institutions to oversee the integration project. – A consensus approach combined with solidarity and tolerance. The EU approach is based on not isolating any member state if they have a major problem (such as Greece in the most recent crisis), hesitance to move forward with policies until the vast majority of member states are ready, and a willingness to provide significant financial transfers to help poorer member states catch up with the norm. These four tenets have guided the EU well over the years and enabled the institutions to survive many crises, from French president Charles de Gaulle's "empty chair" tactic of withdrawing French representatives from EU political bodies in protest of moves to introduce qualified majority voting (QMV) to failed referendums on new treaties in a number of member states, including rejection of the Constitutional Treaty by France and the Netherlands in 2005 and the Lisbon Treaty by Ireland in 2008. More recently, the EU has adopted a more flexible approach resulting in a multi-speed Europe with several tiers of integration. For example, not all member states are in the eurozone, or in the Schengen passport-free zone; this arrangement has allowed some of the more Euro-skeptic countries such as the United Kingdom to opt out of certain obligations. Nevertheless, the core tenet of the EU is readiness to share sovereignty and operate through strong common institutions. Other Regional Groupings There have been several attempts to achieve regional integration outside of Europe—including the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), African Union (AU), Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), and Mercosur in South America—but they have all failed to achieve anything resembling the progress of the EU. ASEAN is the most advanced of these efforts and regularly sends delegations to Brussels to seek ideas from the EU experience; however, ASEAN remains a strictly inter-governmental body and there is no indication of interest in sovereignty sharing. It is a similar story elsewhere: no other regional body is anywhere near the EU in terms of political or economic cooperation, let alone integration. Indeed, no other grouping has even gotten to first base in terms of the basic requirements of integration, namely dealing with historical reconciliation and developing the necessary political will. There have been innumerable declarations from groupings in Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and South and Central America about the desirability of closer cooperation and even integration, but the record shows that the rhetoric has not been matched by action. Although the EU is also guilty of exaggerated rhetoric, it has steadily moved forward—even if on occasion it seems to take two steps forward, one step back. As the EU's experience demonstrates, historical reconciliation is a critical element in developing the necessary political will for cooperation and, ultimately, integration. The fundamental basis for the success of the EU is the historical reconciliation between France and Germany, achieved by years of sustained political effort from the leaders of both countries. In stark contrast, there has been no such effort in many other parts of the world where there are ambitions of regional integration. In East Asia, for example, there can be no integration without genuine reconciliation between Japan and China, and Japan and Korea. The East Asia experience is replicated elsewhere with unresolved problems and deep suspicions between, for example, Brazil and Argentina, India and Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia and its neighbours. Only after historical reconciliation can countries proceed gradually along the various steps required to create a regional community such as a free trade area, a customs union, a single market, a single currency, a common passport area, and a common foreign policy. The State of the Union Compared to most other regions of the world, the EU is a haven of peace, prosperity, and security. Following the global economic crisis, however, there are several major challenges facing the EU that, if not tackled with urgency and determination, could threaten the entire European project. Namely, the EU has grown and integrated rapidly without commensurate strengthening of its political and economic institutions. The emerging gap between necessary coordination and institutional capacity in the EU suggests a lesson for other regional groupings if and when they arrive at later stages of the integration process.
There are two ways to look at the European Parliamentary elections that concluded today. 1.Political stability Contrary to what many media will display this Monday, the results of the elections show a remarkable stability. The three major political families of Europe (Conservative, Socialists and Liberals) will likely reach at least 60 percent of the 751 seats of the Assembly. While that majority narrowed from 70 percent, this vote ensures the continuity of Europe and its institutions, a commitment to market economy and a critical support to the Eurozone. It is remarkable that such a diverse continent with 29 Member States could provide stability and, even more unlikely, coherence between three political families that have been dominating the European nations since World War II. Europeans like Europe. It should dispel the image carried often enough by U.S. politicians or media of a politically unreliable partner for the United States. Europeans are closely united around values such as social justice, peace and progress. They also believe in privacy ahead of security, history ahead of experimentation. Having such a powerful 500 million people political and economic partner should be a source of admiration rather than denigration by the American people. Yet countries who have centuries of conflicts against each other, speak as many languages as they have countries, and sometimes several per country, substantial national and regional characteristics will never be a unified counterparty. Complexity and diversity, however, do not translate into inconsistency and, for historic and modern reasons, many of the European and U.S values are rooted into common religious and social beliefs. 2.Loud and serious warnings Not everything is good, however, in this election. The emergence of anti-European feelings in some countries resulted in an increase of the share of the Eurosceptics in the European Parliament from 5 to 10 percent. It would be wrong, however, to consider this emergence as a single movement. The themes are radically different in various countries, and will not provide a platform that will act with any form of common voice. •Anti immigration was core to the emergence of the UKIP as the leading UK party in this election as well as in the more moderate Danish extreme right leading position. •Anti austerity dominates the rhetoric in over-indebted Italy but without the emergence of an extreme right party. Greece sees a movement towards a now leading extreme left, not the extreme right. •France is a domestic situation dominated by the appalling records of the Socialists and the Conservatives who have consistently taken credit for European achievements and blamed them for their problems. The appalling leadership of Nicolas Sarkozy and Francois Hollande makes both leading parties co-responsible for this debacle that, worryingly, includes elements of racism. This is not the Tea Party, united in racism and militarism, pseudo-inspired by the Evangelism. However, it could create the same trend towards conservative radicalization. 3.Redefining Europe's objectives: growth and employment The lack of good opinions in the modus operandi of the European institutions is, however, an underlying theme of these elections, and most importantly, in the massive abstentions of voters (56 percent). In turn, it increased the relative weight of the extremes. Europeans are fundamentally pro-European in their huge majority. However, the "deficit of democracy" is there. The European Parliament has no right of initiative. Only the European Commission, solidly locked by the Member States, enjoys that privilege. As Angela Merkel -- whose country strongly backed the leading parties -- declared during the campaign, Europe has to be an engine of growth and employment. Not with money, but with the right policies. That should now be the key objectives of European countries, building a competitiveness with Asia and America. For this reason, I hope that Martin Schultz, the German leader of the Socialist fraction, will become the new President of the Commission. The former President of the European Parliament has the right leadership and will work out the institutional paralysis of Europe that makes it hostage of unanimity. For all his personal qualities, Jean-Claude Juncker, albeit the candidate of the leading European party, the PPE, has too much baggage and bears a huge responsibility for the mismanagement of the European sovereign crisis.
This is a hotline moment: When a civilian passenger plane is shot down over a war zone, leaders are forced to see – and hopefully, discuss — the unintended consequences of battle and the accidental risk of war. But, paradoxically, horrifying moments like this can also encourage government leaders to break from the status quo and its cycle of escalation — and think about ways to move back from the brink.
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - The downing of a Malaysian airliner over eastern Ukraine could be a turning point for the Ukraine crisis, if it convinces reluctant Europeans to get behind tougher "sectoral" sanctions long-sought by U.S. President Barack Obama.Although it’s unclear exactly who was behind the apparent ground-launched missile that destroyed the Malaysia Airlines Boeing 777, U.S. allies who have tried to occupy the middle ground in the worst crisis in relations between Russia and the West since the end of the Cold War may now support bolder action to end the fighting in Ukraine.
While it might have been nice to hear the Secretary of State say on Meet The Press Sunday that “you just don’t in the 21st century behave in 19th century fashion by invading another country on completely trumped up pre-text,” that characterization of Russia’s involvement in Ukraine is not the kind of aggressive military response that’s going to reassure those who see this as an issue of strong Putin versus feckless Obama. To people inclined to condemn American “weakness” in the face of Russian aggression, John Kerry’s condemnation of Russia’s military incursion into Crimea might sound like more empty words.
Recent events have forced new attention to the connection between food security and armed conflict. Around 2008, world food prices rose rapidly, causing demonstrations in many countries around the world. The reduction of food subsidies in several Arab countries, for example, has been identified as a contributing factor to the unrest of the Arab Spring. Rapid climate change has focused attention on the potential disruptions caused by rising temperatures and erratic weather on agricultural systems. Discussions of Syria have included space for asking how climate change—in this case, extreme drought—may have contributed to the tensions that led to the outbreak of their civil war. As Harvesting Peace is quick to point out, though, the analytic lens is more complex than saying that food insecurity directly causes conflict. Food security—defined by availability (sufficient supply), access (to the market), utilization (meeting nutritional needs), and stability (regularity of access) of food—can be impacted by armed conflict, a statement for which the evidence is pretty clear. But the evidence that food insecurity also contributes to conflict is less direct. Rather, the literature suggests that it contributes to instability in the same way other economic and social factors would contribute to conflict. For the most part, however, the specifics of this relationship have been understudied. New research highlighted in Harvesting Peace shows that in lower-income countries food price shocks have an outsized impact on stability, because low-income households devote a much larger share of their income to purchasing food. Also, the competency of governments is a factor that interacts directly with food insecurity. A government that is flexible enough to respond immediately to a sudden food crisis, by market interventions to slow inflation or increase supply, is much less likely to see sustained domestic unrest (especially if those measures are targeted at urban consumers, who can organize more easily than their rural counterparts). Studies also show that poverty-based food insecurity can provide an incentive structure for groups to support or participate in armed conflict, if there is a belief that such participation could garner access or control over resources.
The second report, by the nonprofit World Resources Institute, warns that more than a quarter of the planet’s food production comes from “highly water-stressed areas,” according to Salon’s coverage of the study. “That includes half of irrigated cropland, which itself is responsible for 40 percent of the global food supply,” Salon says, defining water stress as a region in which 40 percent or more of the renewable water supply is used up each year. The WRI sees significant global stresses, which you can assess here using the organization’s interactive Web tool. The tension between crop production and available water supply is already great, as agriculture currently accounts for more than 70 percent of all human water withdrawal. But the real problem is that this tension is poised to intensify. The 2030 Water Resources Group forecasts that under business-as-usual conditions, water demand will rise 50 percent by 2030. Water supplies, however, will not—and physically cannot—grow in parallel. Agriculture will drive nearly half of that additional demand, because global calorie production needs to increase 69 percent to feed 9.6 billion people by 2050. The food-water tension won’t just be felt by agriculture, either. Agriculture’s growing thirst will squeeze water availability for municipal use, energy production, and manufacturing. With increasing demand in all sectors, some regions of the world, such as northern China, are already scrambling to find enough water to run their economies.
Fungi, insects and bacteria look set to pose an increasing threat to global food production in years to come, new research reveals. As temperatures rise, crop-destroying pests and diseases are spreading from the tropics toward the poles at a rate of nearly three kilometres per year. The rising problem of pests in some of the world's most productive farmland presents a real threat to global food security, as climate change makes higher latitudes like the US and Europe more hospitable to pests that wouldn't otherwise survive. How bad is the pest problem? For farmers worldwide, pests are already a serious problem. They are responsible for the loss of between 10 and 16 per cent of all crops during production, and result in further losses after harvest i.e. due to infestations in food stores. From microscopic fungi, bacteria and viruses to insects and other animals, there are numerous different species which affect everyday staples like cereals, potatoes, fruit and vegetables. These pests have evolved to breed quickly and disperse easily, allowing them to move readily to find new hosts.
Brown says: “An unprecedented period of world food security has come to an end. The world has lost its safety cushions and is living from year to year. This is the new politics of food scarcity. We are moving into a new food era, one in which it is every country for itself.” “What in the past would have been a relatively simple question of developing better seeds, or opening up new land to grow more food, cannot work now because the challenge of growing food without destroying the environment is deepening.” Brown adds: “New trends such as falling water tables, plateauing grain yields and rising temperatures join soil erosion and climate change to make it difficult, if not impossible, to expand production fast enough.” Four pressing needs must be addressed together, he says. Instead of better seeds, tractors or pumps to raise water, he claims, feeding the world now depends on new population, energy, and water policies. Water scarcity, especially, concerns him. “We live in a world where more than half the people live in countries with food bubbles based on farmers’ over-pumping and draining aquifers. The question is not whether these bubbles will burst, but when. The bursting of several national food bubbles as aquifers are depleted could create unmanageable food shortages. “If world population growth does not slow dramatically, the number of people trapped in hydrological poverty and hunger will only grow.” The madness of the food system since 1950 astonishes him. Last year, the US harvested nearly 400 million tons of grain, of which one third went to ethanol distilleries to fuel vehicles. Meanwhile, more than 130 million people in China alone, he estimates, live in areas where the underground water resources are being depleted at record rates. Why can’t politicians understand that every 1°C above the optimum in the growing season equates to roughly a 10 percent decline in grain yields? he asks. “Yet if the world fails to address the climate issue, the earth’s temperature this century could easily rise by 6°C, devastating food supplies.” The ever greater number of weather-related crises suggests strongly that climate change is beginning to bite and that the heatwaves, droughts and excessive rainfall around the world in the last few years have not been a blip, but a new reality “We have ignored the earth’s environmental stop signs. Faced with falling water tables, not a single country has mobilised to reduce water use. Unless we can wake up to the risks we are taking, we will join earlier civilizations that failed to reverse the environmental trends that undermined their food economies.” He says we know the answers. They include saving water, eating less meat, stopping soil erosion, controlling populations and changing the energy economy. “But they must be addressed together We have to mobilise quickly. Time is the scarcest resource. Success depends on moving at wartime speed. It means transforming the world industrial economy, stabilising populations and rebuilding grain stocks.
In 2014 there are more nuclear weapons than ever, but we don't really talk about them very much. Instead we talk, primarily about the possibility of human extinction due to climate change, food shortages, ocean acidification or, occasionally, super-volcanos or comet collisions. All of these things are possible, and all of them are very unlikely to cause the extinction of humanity. Given our current population, if something killed 99.99 per cent of the human population, 700,000 people would survive and those people would have the knowledge necessary to make drinking water safe, create sanitation systems, advanced communication systems, make medicines, transportation systems and generate electricity. During the 20th century, we experienced the dust bowl and the great depression, two world wars, worldwide pandemics, numerous genocides and still managed to triple our population and double life expectancy in 100 years. We are a resilient species. It is likely that, by the end of this century, we'll inhabit a second planet and vastly increase our life expectancy rather than face extinction.
Since the end of the Second World War, direct conflict among the great powers has been seemingly non-existent, marking the longest absence of major war since the days of the Roman Empire.8 Given the scale and frequency of major war in previous centuries, this absence may be the single most important discontinuity that the history of warfare has ever seen.9 Though not without tension, great power relations are now generally characterized by a sense of peace, with states carrying out aggressions through diplomatic or economic, rather than military, means. Indeed, as the threat of major   war has declined, most great powers have chosen to invest fewer resources in developing a strong military, undergoing a notable downsizing in both the size of their armed forces and the quantity of weapons at their disposal since 1945.10 While most great powers had possessed forces numbering several million men throughout much of the twentieth century, as of the late 1990s, the only states maintaining forces exceeding a million and a half were India and China, and at that time, China had announced it would be cutting half a million of its troops.11 In addition to directly cutting their forces, most states have also eliminated conscription, a once useful system that provided a great deal of cannon fodder for the institution of major war.12 Air forces, naval forces, and nuclear weapons stores have also witnessed similar reductions worldwide.13 Indicative of the current sense of great power peace, these reductions would also seem to imply that none of the great powers anticipates a major war to break out any time in the near future, supporting the idea that major war is becoming obsolete.
Although war may create a strong sense of emotional and spiritual satisfaction, it also creates repulsion in those who fight and in wider society. The euphoria at the beginning of WWI turned into repulsion with the war and war in general; the nationalism and intolerance of dissent in the US in the early days of the 2003 Iraq War gave way to widespread disgust with the war and questioning of American motives. The myth of war sooner or later gives way to the sensory reality of war, and when it does, the public no longer celebrates but rather condemns the violence (Hedges, 2002). Furthermore, in the past century there does seem to have been a transformation in how people think of war. War in general is no longer glorified as an honourable practice, but is instead criminalized, with those who initiate it seen as rogue actors (Mandelbaum, 1998). Ray attributes this change to modern ideas about the value of the individual human life, which are expressed not only in changing attitudes toward war, but also in changes toward capital punishment and human sacrifice (Ray, 1989), and perhaps the rise of the global human rights regime. A parallel could be made with slavery: a shift in attitudes about the morality of slavery was instrumental in its demise as an accepted practice (Ray, 1989), and while slavery still exists today, it is a criminal enterprise that is rejected by public opinion and by law. There is an important difference between institutionalized legal slavery and criminalized slavery, and similarly there is a difference between these two types of war. The outcome of this modern moral shift toward war, given the fact that war continues to exert an emotional pull on people and societies, is arguably neither the disappearance of war, nor the continuation of business as usual, but rather the transformation of war. War, a ‘protean activity’ (Keegan, 1998), has transformed in order to remain acceptable to modern attitudes. In response to the almost universal repulsion with long and bloody wars, the destructiveness of war has been limited through technologies and tactics (Coker, 2008). So, for example, there has been increasing development and use of precision weaponry to minimize civilian casualties, as well as unmanned technology such as drones to lessen, and one day perhaps eliminate, military casualties on our own side. Warfare has become increasingly constrained by laws prohibiting the use of certain weapons. Similarly, war is justified through rhetoric of self-defence or humanitarianism, not in terms of the national interest or honour and glory for the nation. The requirement, by domestic opinion and international law, that wars be “just” in their means and in the reasons for waging them, is a serious constraint on the ability and willingness of states to go to war for classical national interests.
Is major war now obsolete? Surely no question is more important. The threat and the fact of organized violence on the largest possible scale have dominated the twentieth century. There has hardly been a moment between 1914 and 1998 when major war - or the anticipation of it or planning for it - was not a powerfully influential fact of international life. There was scarcely apolitical development of any consequence that was unaffected by major war, actual or prospective. This question has an answer. The answer is yes': major war is obsolete, if this statement's two adjectives are properly defined. It is major war, not war in general - collective killing for some purpose - that is obsolete, as the contents of any daily newspaper make clear. War has not been abolished. What is increasingly unlikely is a war fought by the most powerful members of the international system, drawing on all of their resources and using every weapon at their command, over a period of years, leading to an outcome with revolutionary geopolitical consequences including the birth and death of regimes, the redrawing of borders and the reordering of the hierarchy of sovereign states. There have been four such wars in the last two centuries: the wars of the French Revolution (1792-1815); the First World War (l9l4-l8)', the Second World War (1939-45); and the Cold War (late 1940s- early 1990s). It is the numerically small but historically monumental class of wars to which these four conflicts all belong that is obsolete. Major war is not impossible. None of the countries that would take part in another major conflict has renounced War entirely; indeed, all are prepared to fight. A major war is unlikely but not unthinkable. There are still people charged with the responsibility for waging such a conflict and they continue to think about it. But it is obsolete in the sense that it is no longer in fashion. It is obsolete in the sense that it no longer serves the purpose for which it was designed. It has gone out of fashion not through any decree or ruling, but rather as the result of trends and developments that are not under the control of any agency or authority. To obsolesce is intransitive verb. Obsolescence is not imposed or created by anyone or anything; it happens. In the case of major war, the signs that obsolescence is happening are abundant. The trend began while the most recent major War was still under way. The Cold War lacked a central feature of its three predecessors: direct battles between and among the belligerent powers. Since it ended, the trend toward obsolescence has gathered momentum. Major war is talked and written about less than before. Articles, essays, books, lectures and symposia are more likely to study the global economy than global warfare. Crises in Europe and Asia are economic rather than military in nature. The shift has apparently also made an impression on the vast majority of the world’s inhabitants who do not read articles or attend conferences on inter- national affairs. In the summer of 1998, as in other summers, the US film industry sought to appeal to what is evidently a broad interest in and presumably fear of, the Earth's destruction. Hollywood, whose economic viability depends on accurately gauging the global Zeitgeist offered two motion pictures with a contemporary version of the apocalypse as their theme. In the films Deep Impact and Armageddon, however, the threat of total destruction came not, as in previous examples of the genre, from major war waged with weapons of mass destruction (WIVID). Rather, it came from the random workings of the cosmos, in the forms, respectively, of an asteroid and a meteor rushing towards Earth that must be destroyed or deflected by heroic measures if life as we know it is to continue. Major war is apparently no longer plausible enough to serve as the premise of a major motion picture, which is one sure sign of obsolescence at work. Yet another sign is the appearance of a term to describe the trends that contribute to it: debellicisation.' Unlike the word that is perhaps closest to being a synonym – ‘warlessness’ - its Latin root gives debellicisation a solid, scientific aura, like a newly discovered species of plant or element of the periodic table. And while warlessness implies an achieved condition, debellicisation suggests an ongoing process.
The world's largest country by population and its largest country by area differ in important ways. Two years before the new millennium, China's economy, power and international status are growing while Russia's are shrinking. Russia is a democracy, albeit a shaky one. Chinese politics are not, and never have been, conducted according to democratic principles. Russia is part of the European system of common security. In East Asia there is no such system - there are no treaties regulating armaments of which China can be a part. But Russia and China are similar in one crucial way: the continuing obsolescence of major war depends most heavily on them. This is not because either is the most powerful member of the international system, a distinction that will surely belong to the US until well into the twenty-first century. It is not because the government of either country is the most bellicose on the planet, a title Iraqi President Saddam Hussein seems likely to retain as long as he remains in power. Rather, of the countries that could start a major war, Russia and China are the two most likely to do so. 9' They are large enough and powerful enough, actually or potentially, economically and militarily, to qualify as potential great powers. Their attitudes towards international politics and armed conflict are closer to those of the great powers at the end of the nineteenth century than to the views prevailing in the debellicised late twentieth-century democracies. Neither country is fully or irreversibly democratic; China is not democratic at all. Neither is used to conciliation within its own borders, let alone in dealings with other countries. National prestige is of prime importance to both; the memory of lost status and past humiliations - for Russia, in the very recent past - rankles in sections of both countries' political classes. For both governments, spheres of influence are not entirely obsolete: Russia claims one on the territory of the former Soviet Union; China asserts a proprietary interest in the South China Sea. For all these reasons, in neither Russia nor China has the traditional interest in military balances been entirely eclipsed by the prevailing Western concern with trade balances. Still, at the end of the twentieth century neither country appears to be girding for a major war. Both are focused inward, preoccupied with economic rather than military matters. Neither fully endorses the policies and practices of the US, but the differences are sources of irritation rather than confrontation. Russia and China persist, for example, in purveying armaments and technology suitable for making WMD to countries that the US insists should not have them; but this is the occasion for diplomatic friction instead of war. Neither Moscow nor Beijing is entirely satisfied with all of the political, military and economic arrangements of the post-Cold War world, especially Washington’s central role in devising and managing them. But neither government is committed, as were their orthodox communist predecessors, to the violent overthrow of those arrangements.
Political, social and technological trends that began or have accelerated in the twentieth century have made major war obsolete by raising its costs while reducing the incentives for waging it. Major war is obsolete in the way that styles of dress are obsolete: it is something that is out of fashion and, while it could be revived, there is no present demand for it. Major war is obsolete in the way that slavery, dueling or foot-binding are obsolete: it is a social practice that was once considered normal, useful- even desirable - but that now seems odious.3 It is obsolete in the way that the central planning of economic activity is obsolete: it is a practice once regarded as a plausible, indeed a superior way of achieving a socially desirable goal, but that changing conditions have made ineffective at best, counter-productive at worst. It is possible that not only major war - protracted struggles among great powers with revolutionary consequences for international politics - but even modern war - the use of mechanized weapons in formal battles between the professional armed forces of sovereign states - is dying out. The toll that modern weapons extract and the diminishi.ng benefits their use seems likely to bring, which are potent factors in the foreign policies of the great powers, must weigh on the calculations of the lesser ones as well" True, Washington is even now preparing to fight two modern wars. The precedents for the two 'major regional contingencies' that form the basis for post-Cold War US military planning are wars the US fought in Korea in the early 1950s and in the Persian Gulf in 1991. Not coincidentally, the regimes against which the US went to war on those occasions remain in power in both places. But neither North Korea's Kim Il Sung nor Iraq's Saddam Hussein believed, when they launched the attack that began each war, that it would lead to a military confrontation with the US, and it is unlikely that either regime is eager to repeat the experience. Warlessness may still be unknown on the Korean Peninsula and in the Middle East, but there is no reason to doubt that deterrence has put down roots in both places. Of the varieties of war, it is not the Second World War model that is growing in popularity. It is, rather, 'unconventional' conflict s, waged by irregular forces that attack civilian not military targets. Guerrillas, terrorists, members of private militias - even malevolent computer hackers - seem to be displacing the form ally trained, well-equipped, publicly funded soldier who waged the twentieth century's wars. The practice of war, once the prerogative of the strong of the international system, is instead increasingly the tactic of the weak.
War is a venerable human activity, dating back millennia; and even if the category of war for which obsolescence is claimed includes only the four great conflicts of the modern era, that still makes it more than two centuries old. Nor have human aggressiveness and political differences, the combustible mixture from which all wars arise, disappeared. Thus the burden of proof - or rather the burden of argument, since the assertion is not subject to absolute proof - rests on those of us who suggest what must be the case if major war is truly obsolete, namely that something fi.1ndamental has changed in international politics. The comments here are intended to elaborate that argument, made originally in the Winter 1998-99 issue of Survival, as well as to respond, in part, to my colleagues' points. They fall into four categories: the definition of obsolescence; its ingredients; its significance; and the implications of my argument for national foreign policies. What, precisely, does it mean to say that major war is 'obsolete'? On the spectrum of probability, obsolete falls somewhere between impossible and unlikely. Major war had already become unlikely during the Cold War because of the existence of nuclear weapons, which had (and have) the power to make war between and among the major powers catastrophically expensive. What is new is a combination of cultural attitudes and diplomatic arrangements that make major war, in Europe at least, even less likely than it was during the last decades of the East-West rivalry, when deterrence through the threat of mutual annihilation was in force. Then the major powers were afraid of war because the costs might be too high. Now, in addition, they are uninterested in war because the benefits of winning are judged so modest. What I have called in my 1996 book The Dawn of Peace in Europe, the continent's 'common security order' has two parts. The first, visible part, and the crown jewel of late Cold War and post-Cold War diplomacy, is a landmark series of treaties limiting armaments. These treaties reduce the insecurity endemic to a world divided into independent sovereign states. The mere fact of sovereignty, or, as it is called in the literature of international relations, the 'anarchy' of the international system, is a potential cause of war because it means that every country must guard against the possibility that it might be attacked; there is no global authority to prevent this. These treaties provide for transparency, so that every country can know exactly what armaments every other one has, and what they are doing with their arms. The treaties also reconfigure nuclear and non-nuclear weapons in Europe to make them suitable for defence but not attack. The net effect is to engender a higher degree of confidence than modem Europe has ever had that there will be no major war there. Underpinning the treaties is a complex of attitudes, widely held and deeply rooted in the industrial democracies, although less prominent elsewhere, that I have called 'warlessness'. Warlessness is what motivates Europeans and North Americans to limit their weapons voluntarily in ways that build confidence among potential adversaries that they harbour no aggressive designs. It is the conviction that war is both abnormal and undesirable, and that it is usually illegitimate to fight for the goals on behalf of which wars have been waged in the past: wealth, territory, glory.
The discovery that democracies seldom fight each other has led, quite reasonably, to the conclusion that democracy causes peace, at least within the community of liberal polities. Explanations abound, but a consensus account of the dyadic democratic peace has been surprisingly slow to materialize. I offer a theory of liberal peace based on capitalism and common interstate interests. Economic development, capital market integration, and the compatibility of foreign policy preferences supplant the effect of democracy in standard statistical tests of the democratic peace. In fact, after controlling for regional heterogeneity, any one of these three variables is sufficient to account for effects previously attributed to regime type in standard samples of wars, militarized interstate disputes (MIDs), and fatal disputes. 1 If war is a product of incompatible interests and failed or abortive bargaining, peace ensues when states lack differences worthy of costly conflict, or when circumstances favor successful diplomacy. Realists and others argue that state interests are inherently incompatible, but this need be so only if state interests are narrowly defined or when conquest promises tangible benefits. Peace can result from at least three attributes of mature capitalist economies. 1 Additional tests of key variables, model specifications, and possible confounding factors appear in the appendix. A Stata “do” file replicating all aspects of the analysis is available from the author. First, the historic impetus to territorial expansion is tempered by the rising importance of intellectual and financial capital, factors that are more expediently enticed than conquered. Land does little to increase the worth of the advanced economies while resource competition is more cheaply pursued through markets than by means of military occupation. At the same time, development actually increases the ability of states to project power when incompatible policy objectives exist. Development affects who states fight (and what they fight over) more than the overall frequency of warfare. Second, substantial overlap in the foreign policy goals of developed nations in the post–World War II period further limits the scope and scale of conflict. Lacking territorial tensions, consensus about how to order the international system has allowed liberal states to cooperate and to accommodate minor differences. Whether this affinity among liberal states will persist in the next century is a question open to debate. Finally, the rise of global capital markets creates a new mechanism for competition and communication for states that might otherwise be forced to fight. Separately, these processes influence patterns of warfare in the modern world. Together, they explain the absence of war among states in the developed world and account for the dyadic observation of the democratic peace. American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 51, No. 1, January 2007, Pp. 166–191. The notion of a capitalist peace is hardly new. Montesquieu, Paine, Bastiat, Mill, Cobden, Angell, and others saw in market forces the power to end war. Unfortunately, war continued, leading many to view as overly optimistic classical conceptions of liberal peace. This study an be seen as part of an effort to reexamine capitalist peace theory, revising arguments in line with contemporary insights much as Kantian claims were reworked in response to evolving evidence of a democratic peace. Existing empirical research on the democratic peace, while addressing many possible alternatives, provides an incomplete and uneven treatment of liberal economic processes. Most democratic peace research examines trade in goods and services but ignores capital markets and offers only a cursory assessment of economic development (Maoz and Russett 1992). Several studies explore the impact of interests, though these have largely been dismissed by democratic peace advocates (Oneal and Russett 1999a; Russett and Oneal 2001). These omissions or oversights help to determine the democratic peace result and thus shape subsequent research, thinking, and policy on the subject of liberal peace. This study offers evidence that liberal economic processes do in fact lead to peace, even accounting for the well-documented role of liberal politics. Democracy cohabitates with peace. It does not, by itself, lead nations to be less conflict prone, not even toward other democracies. The argument and evidence provided here are bound to draw criticism. Skepticism in the face of controversial claims is natural, reasonable, even essential for the cumulation of knowledge. The democratic peace observation is supported by an exceptionally large and sophisticated body of research. 2 At the same time, excessive deference to previous conclusions privileges conventional wisdom. 3 A willingness to doubt that which we have come to believe is a hallmark of scientific inquiry. Indeed, the weight of existing evidence does not directly contradict this study as previous research has typically failed to address the 2 Empirical regularity cannot be the only reason for broad interest in the democratic peace. As Cederman (2003) points out, the relationship between the frequency and intensity of wars is also “lawlike” (literally a power rule). This relationship has generated little interest and received almost no attention since its discovery by Richardson (1960). 3 Accumulation is not cumulation. Replication offers a limited form of robustness. As one author puts it, “Is it surprising that repeatedly testing the same primary independent and dependent variables generally produces the same results?” (Van Belle 2006, 14). Jervis (1976) offers an entertaining parable based on the writings of A. A. Milne. While out hunting “woozles,” Piglet and Winnie-the-Pooh mistake their own tracks in the snow for those of their elusive prey. As the two frightened characters circle back on their own trail, the “evidence” of woozles mounts....claims of classical liberal political economists like Montesquieu, Richard Cobden, and Norman Angell. As with previous research, this study finds support for a liberal peace, though the key causal variables, and some major policy implications, are considerably changed.
Liberal theorists also make a number of claims concerning the prevention of international conflict, each of which draws upon a different causal logic. First, one set of claims asserts that economic trade replaces conquest as a means of exchange, thus lowering expected levels of conflict. What would formally be gained through war can now be traded. Rosecrance's (1986) concept of the "trading state" is an example of this theory and illustrates how trade and exchange may decrease the incentives to engage in conflict. This variant of liberalism holds that higher levels of trade can remove the economic-based incentives for conflict, leading to a more peaceful international environment.' A second and more common logic posits that open commerce dampens political conflict by promoting economic dependence. This argument, which Stein refers to as "binding commercial liberalism" (1993, 353), has been stressed in most recent studies of international conflict (Oneal and Russett 1997, 1999a). Open trade encourages specialization in the production of goods and services, rendering private traders and consumers dependent on foreign markets. These actors have an incentive to avoid wars with key trading partners, since disruptions in commercial relations would be costly. Governments, which have reason to respond to demands made by key constituents and to enhance a country's economic performance, face similar incentives. A third and more recent strain of interdependence theory has grown out of the rationalist causes of war literature (see Fearon 1995) and offers a similar prediction about trade and conflict. This argument, laid out by Morrow (1999) as well as Gartzke, Li, and Boehmer (2001) begins with the idea that trade levels among states are not private information. Thus, by itself, trade cannot cause binding since either side knows the other's constraints when entering a costly bargaining contest. What trade does give a state, however, is a broader pallet from which to select signals, so pairs of states with higher levels of trade are more likely to provide signals (through state economic polices or through markets) which will avert war. If this "pallet" argument is true, major conflicts will be deterred since states can use trade as a signaling device to show resolve.
The institution with which war historically has been connected is the state, which, as the saying goes, was made by war for the purpose of making war. Sovereign states remain a central presence in human affairs at the end of the twentieth century. But in the societies that waged the modern era's major wars, the state has found a different purpose. It has become an economic institution. To spur production and manage redistribution have become its twin missions. In all Western countries, social-welfare programmes claim a greater share of the national treasure than the cost of underwriting the armed forces. In addition to how it spends its money, the kind of person selected to lead it is a measure of the state’s purpose. Here, too, the shift from warfare to welfare is apparent. In Germany and Japan post-1945, the supreme national leader was selected for economic rather than military expertise. Later, the UK and France both followed suit: Harold Wilson took up Winston Churchill's post; Giscard d'Estaing assumed Charles de Gaulle's. With the end of the Cold War, the US has fallen into line. Its current chief executive is a man with no military experience or expertise who gained and held the presidency by defeating two opponents who were both Second World War heroes. Bill C1inton's principal public talent is empathy - no doubt a virtue, but not a martial one. His two electoral victories are signs of the times, or at least of what the US electorate has taken to be the tenor of the times in the 19903. Perhaps most tellingly, the test of the legitimacy of governments, and thus the survival of contemporary regimes, is likely to be economic rather than military. The Soviet Union was not defeated on the field of battle. It collapsed from within, in no small part because of economic failures. The regime's efforts to succeed in the military sphere, its enormous expenditures on weapons and armed forces, contributed to those economic failures." In the summer of 1998, the Soviet Union's successor, Boris Yelts'1n's government in Moscow, was threatened by the weakness not of the Russian military (although it was certainly weak) but of the Russian rouble. Sovereign states are pushed towards an economic rather than a military emphasis because they are governed by democratic principles. The first and, for debellicisation, the most relevant of these principles is popular sovereignty, control of the government by the populace. Most people are more interested in becoming wealthy than in risking their lives in war. Yet another reason for the obsolescence of major war at the twentieth century's close, therefore, is the fact that a growing number of sovereign states are increasingly democratic.
Many scholars who argue that the worst of war is behind us, that war is becoming obsolete, or that major inter-state war is disappearing, base their arguments on war’s failure to be a rational policy instrument in modern times (Kaysen, 1990; Keegan, 1998; Mandelbaum, 1998; Mueller, 1989). They emphasize the higher economic cost of going to war and the diminished gains from winning one (Kaysen, 1990; Mandelbaum, 1998), because of trade and economic interdependence, the state’s new role as a market state, and the declining importance of territory for a state’s economy (Kaysen, 1990). They also credit the existence of other, less costly ways to solve political problems, primarily through international institutions, and stress the role that international organizations have played in mitigating the insecurities of an anarchical international system (Mandelbaum, 1998). Some emphasize the role of particularly destructive modern technologies, especially nuclear weapons, saying that these change the calculation of risk, and damage war’s ability to serve as a policy instrument (Kaysen, 1990; Waltz, 1981). According to Kaysen, no state will initiate a war unless it expects to gain politically or economically, and the changes in both these areas in the past 150 years have altered this calculation, so that war no longer recommends itself as a useful instrument (1990).
In Spirit of the Laws, Montesquieu argues that "movable wealth" encourages peace between and within states. Mobile capital constrains the sovereign domestically. "The richest trader had only invisible wealth which could be sent everywhere without leaving any trace ... [so that] rulers have been compelled to govern with greater wisdom than they themselves would have thought."32 Trade is only one manifestation of the global spread of capitalism.33 Since capital markets dwarf the exchange of goods and services, firms should weigh the risks of investment much more heavily than trade. Foreign production facilities are vulner- able to nationalization in a way that trade is not. Further, even the threat of lost revenues makes investors skittish. Globalization has increased capital mobility and monetary cooperation even as it redefines the terms on which states compete. State policies aim to preserve political autonomy, but states are faced with a dilemma when seeking to influence interstate finance. Vittorio Grilli and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti suggest that states impose capital controls for four reasons: limiting volatile short-term capital flows, retaining domestic savings, sustaining structural reform and stabilization programs, and maintaining the tax base.34 States engage financial repression for similar reasons.35 However, states may find capital controls less useful when facing integrated capital markets and pressures to liberalize from powerful interest groups such as multinational corporations and financial institu- tions.36 Edward L. Morse points out that when states fail to reduce their vulnera- bility and solve the crises that arise through interdependence, they may seek to externalize problems.37 Interdependence may even transmit economic crises.38 Thus, the literature suggests that interdependence could increase conflict between states while decreasing the chances of violent, militarized behavior. 
Trade and direct investment increase cross-border economic contact and raise a state's stake in maintaining linkages. Monetary coordination and interdepen- dence demand that states strike deals. Through such interactions, states create a broad set of mutually beneficial economic linkages. While these linkages may deter very modest clashes, their main impact is as a substitute method for resolving conflict. Political shocks that threaten to damage or destroy economic linkages generate information, reducing uncertainty when leaders bargain. Threats from interdependent states carry more weight than threats from autarchic states precisely because markets inform observers as to the veracity of political "cheap talk." Multiple channels of economic interactions help states to credibly communicate, increasing the "vocabulary" available to states in attempting to assess relative resolve. A signaling interpretation of interdependence offers some promise both analyti- cally and in terms of international events. If costly signaling through economic interdependence reduces states' recourse to military violence, then increasing economic interdependence (globalization) implies the prospect of a more pacific global system. The magnitude of the pacific effect of interdependence is difficult to assess, however, since other factors, such as increasing polarization, may add to the motives for conflict. At the same time, the signaling argument implies that much of the variance in the propensity for conflict is unknowable.83 Before we can have greater confidence in our results, we need to examine a larger data sample, including all dyads and longer time spans. Precise measures may be obtained by limiting the sample to U.S. dyads. Finally, the effects of democracy on conflict appear to require additional assessment. However, our findings provide evidence (and a rationale) suggesting that liberal economics may be at least as salient to peace as liberal politics.
Throughout history, one of the primary motivating factors for engaging in war was conquest, the capturing of another state’s territory and the resources it contained. As indicated above, conquest was especially profitable in landholding societies, where land was the main source of economic and political power. It was also a worthy endeavour in early trading societies where city centers became the hub of economic activity and contained valuable assets that could be easily captured in war. However, the extent to which conquest is still a profitable endeavour in the contemporary world, such that the benefits of undertaking this activity exceed the costs, is questionable, especially for the great powers. Although the opportunity for a one-time looting remains, and is likely even more advantageous than it was in the past given the available loot, the long-term benefits associated with major war and conquest seem to be lost.54 Ultimately, it would seem that, when dealing with wars among great powers, this endeavour is no longer beneficial for a number of reasons, including the growth of nationalism, the economic interdependence among states, and the increasingly global scale of production. Beginning with the idea of nationalism, it would seem that as these sentiments have grown, the benefits associated with conquest have become less of a guarantee. Attacking a country with even a minor element of nationalist sentiment, which appears to be held in some form by all of the great powers, is a dangerous endeavour, as one risks ensuing political hostility on the part of the conquered.55 Not only would the conquering states have to undergo the costs of stifling uprisings, but the energy and efficiency with which the conquered economy operates would likely be lost, leading to less than favourable results than the conquering state had hoped to achieve.56 In this sense, rather than undertaking the risks associated with conquest, it would seem far more prudent to simply increase domestic production and continue engaging in trade with the rest of the world. Indeed, in today’s world, economic strength does not arise so much from the control of territory and resources as it does from access to global markets.57 States now operate in a truly global economy, relying on one another for imported goods and serving as markets for one another’s exports. Although such interstate trade has been occurring for centuries, the economic interdependence among states that we are witnessing today is truly unprecedented, with states’ economic prosperity depending on peaceful trading relations with other states. Possessing the strongest economies in the world, the great powers are especially dependent on these relations. In fact, it was their efforts that brought about the World Trade Organization (WTO), formerly the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), to supervise these trading relations and ensure that they proceed in an orderly manner. In this sense, to engage in war with one another and disrupt these critical relations would seem equivalent to economic suicide, boding particularly badly for their populations who rely on international trade for their well-being.58 Thus, the loss of the significant economic gains that typically accompany global trade would seem to serve as another deterrent to the pursuit of major war. Closely related to this, it is arguable that the significant decline in the benefits of conquest among the most highly advanced countries is due to changes in the structure of global production. Proposed by political scientist Stephen Brooks, this argument asserts that trade is being overtaken by global production as the most important integrating force in the international economy.59 In fact, much of the trade in today’s world is a by-product of the globalization of production, of the outsourcing of the production of goods and services to locations around the globe in an attempt to minimize production costs.60 Such globalization is changing the incentives facing states and contributing to the shifting profitability of major war. As Brooks suggests, the globalization of production has played a profound role in the transition of most modern states from economies based on land to ones based on knowledge and human capital, a fact that has greatly lowered the benefits of conquest.61 In the post-World War II period, the globalization of production has taken off as communication and transportation technologies have allowed development, research, and management to take place in one area of the world while production occurs in another. This trend has allowed the most advanced countries of the world to increasingly specialize in knowledge-based industries as developing countries undertake the necessary production processes. As these changes have occurred, the benefits of conquest among great powers have significantly declined. Whereas, in the past, the economic assets available to the conqueror could be easily seized, whether in the form of land, machines, etc., this is no longer the case. After all, although they can be captured, human beings and the information they possess are highly mobile and difficult to definitively acquire. The geographic dispersion of production associated with this globalizing process has also shifted the profitability calculations surrounding major war.62 As global firms, which are typically based in the great power countries, have been increasingly outsourcing their production to areas of the developing world, the idea of conquering a great power country has declined in appeal as such a conquest would likely only result in obtaining a small portion of the global production chain. Even until quite recently, if a state invaded a country with a particular production sector, it would possess the entire chain of production and be able to produce all of the necessary inputs for the particular good. However, to do so now would likely require conquering multiple countries. Although it may be argued that possessing even a small portion of the production chain is valuable, the point to be made here is that it is less valuable than it would have been in the past. The argument is not that there are no benefits to be obtained from one great power conquering another, but that such benefits are significantly declining. The final point of Brooks' analysis that is worthy of note pertains to the role of foreign direct investment (FDI). Brooks points out that, in addition to the declining profitability of conquest, a substitute can be found in the form of FDI, which has become increasingly more prevalent since the Second World War. According to Brooks, FDI allows states to achieve many of the same benefits of conquest without actually undergoing any of the costs.63 In this sense, although not a perfect substitute, when combined with the decreasing profitability associated with conquest, it is arguable that FDI has further reduced incentives for engaging in major war. Ultimately, it would seem that, economically speaking, the benefits to be attained from major war have declined to the point of virtual non-existence. Not only are the anticipated gains less significant, but major war would also likely disrupt the trade and foreign investment upon which the economies of these countries depend. In fact, those citizens whose livelihoods are contingent on these economic relations remaining stable can be expected to lobby against major war and in favour of great power peace. However, this is only truly possible in a democracy, the spread of which also seems to have contributed to the obsolescence of major war.
Major war in the twentieth century is more costly - that is, more destructive - than previous wars of any kind. Ten million people died fighting during the First World War and millions more perished from war-related disease. The death toll for the Second World War was 50m, although fewer than half of the victims were in uniform? The two world wars were more costly than any in the past, chiefly because the instruments of war were more deadly and destructive. It is perhaps true that the twentieth century's great wars did not destroy a larger proportion of the productive capacities of the societies that waged them, nor kill a higher percentage of these societies' populations, than previous conflicts.' But the opportunity costs of twentieth-century wars were higher because the benefits of peace were greater. There was far more productive capacity to destroy in the twentieth century than ever before. Because life expectancy was higher, moreover, those killed by war in the last 100 years were deprived of more of life, and life of a higher material quality, than the victims of previous conflicts. For most of recorded history, famine and disease posed greater dangers to most people than war. In this century, armed conflict came into its own as the most fearsome, and feared, cause of unnatural death' In the last two centuries, the expansion of organized violence ran parallel to - indeed, was part of - the expansion of economic production. Armed forces themselves became industrial organizations. They recruited and trained young men to carry out specialized tasks and systematically harnessed science and technology for the purpose of mass production. What armed forces produced, on a mass scale, was not automobiles or refrigerators; it was death and destruction. The ultimate creation of applying science and technology to the art of warfare was, and is, nuclear weapons. The expansion of destructive force that they embody is extraordinary. The firepower carried by one submarine equipped with nuclear-tipped ballistic missiles could inflict more damage on any of the Second World War's belligerent powers than all the destruction any of them suffered during the course of that conflict, which - especially in the cases of Germany, Japan and the Soviet Union - was vast indeed. The destruction that a large-scale exchange of nuclear weapons would cause - and it was widely assumed during the Cold War that any use of them between the US and the Soviet Union would trigger a large-scale exchange - was so great that it certainly would not meet one of the criteria for a major war.' It would not be conducted over a period of years; it might last only hours. It is questionable whether such a spasm of mass destruction, including mass killing, could truly be called a war, defined as an act of organized violence for a political purpose. To what political end would a nuclear war be a plausible means? The countries waging it could count on destroying their adversary, but at the cost of their own destruction. This is not a trade-off likely to commend itself to a minimally rational person. The enormous, unprecedented, almost unimaginable destruction a nuclear war could bring had a restraining effect on the two major nuclear powers during the Cold War, which in tum was and is a principal element of the obsolescence of major war. Washington and Moscow maneuvered to avoid placing themselves in a position in which nuclear weapons might be used. The episodes when nuclear use seemed imminent - the crises over Berlin in 1961 and Cuba in 1962 - were rare, and the experience of living through them enhanced the common Soviet and American determination that they should not be repeated. The anticipation of nuclear combat had an effect on government’s com- parable to the impact on individual soldiers of the increasingly dangerous and stressful reality of non-nuclear combat in the twentieth century: extreme aversion. The circumspect behavior during the nuclear crises and the resolute efforts to avoid them can be seen as a variation of the shellshock that made those who suffered from it unfit to return to battle. While the cost of major war has risen sharply, what its ever rising price can purchase now seems increasingly unattractive to potential customers. Even independently of its costs, the incentives for major War have shrivelled.
Although, initially, these developments did not serve as a deterrent to major war, as time progressed, the physical costs associated with such total wars became evident, culminating in the catastrophic World Wars of the twentieth century. These wars, which saw the great powers mobilize their entire economies to devastate one another, far exceeded those of the past in terms of destructiveness and scale.42 The loss of life tied to these wars was significant, with ten million people dying fighting during World War I and another fifty million during World War II, though, in the case of the latter, more than half of those who perished were civilians.43 Although these numbers do not necessarily indicate that the World Wars killed a larger proportion of these societies’ populations than previous conflicts, insofar as life expectancy and quality of life had improved, the opportunity cost associated with these casualties was higher.44 Moreover, the costs of these wars were not limited to casualties. Beyond these high death tolls, those states that saw the wars play out on their home soil witnessed the destruction of a large amount of their infrastructure and tangible capital stocks.45 The diversion of their economies to the pursuit of war also resulted in most states losing years of domestic economic growth.46 Overall, the damage wrought by the First and Second World Wars, and the memory of such, would seem to restrain any great power leader from undertaking aggression. Although the Second World War witnessed the use of nuclear weapons, it is arguable that conventional weapons would have been sufficient to deter the great powers from engaging in future wars with one another. That is, as argued by John Mueller, while certainly devastating, the destruction wrought by conventional weapons during these wars implies that, even if nuclear weapons had never been created, the great powers would still be averse to warring with one another.47 As indicated above, it would seem that many of the great powers had been sufficiently sobered by the atrocities of the First World War and would not have engaged in the Second if it were not for Hitler’s aggressive behaviour. To believe that they would then engage in a Third, even without the presence of nuclear weapons, thus appears questionable. Ultimately, nuclear weapons may have increased the destructive potential of major war, but this need not imply that the destruction before was not sufficient for deterrence to occur. As
Democracies tend not to go to war, at least not with one another. While the association of democratic political systems with peaceful international conduct may not rise to the level of a Newtonian law of history, neither can the post- l945 absence of armed conflict between and among democracies reasonably be classified as completely coincidental, or due entirely to the exigencies of the periods geopolitics. The correlation is not wholly spurious." Democracy presents institutional obstacles to war by empowering the part of society that, in the twentieth century, pays the highest price for conflict: the public. It mandates the open conduct of public business, making surprise attacks more difficult to launch. It often establishes a division of power among different bodies, making any decision, including a decision for war, time- consuming. Standard features of democratic government - elections, transparency and the separation of powers - make the infernal machine of war difficult to operate. The democratic version of that machine is noisy, it has many moving parts, and the parts themselves can rebel against the operators. Democracy has, moreover, a cultural affinity with peace: the standard procedures of compromise, accommodation and the peaceful resolution of disputes within the borders of a democracy, when extended to relations with other sovereign states, reduce the chance of armed conflict. Democratic politics contribute to warlessness in yet another way. They help to weaken the effects of, although they do not eliminate, the one cause of war that has survived the twentieth century intact, the cause that stands, in the eyes of some, as the chief obstacle to universal debellicisation: the structure of international politics.
The spread of liberal democracy, referring to a form of democracy that embraces a market economy, juridical rights for citizens, and a government based on universal suffrage, is another factor often deemed to account for the obsolescence of major war, with many scholars noting that democratic states almost never war against one another.64 This generalization, which is referred to as the “democratic peace,” has not yet been refuted by history, and while it could be argued that it is merely a coincidence, democracies having only existed for a short amount of time, it seems unlikely that this is the case.65 As it stands, almost all of the great powers of the international system are democratic, with China being the only exception. Thus, if the democratic peace theory continues to hold with time, this could be another way to account for the obsolescence of major war. To be sure, there are a number of possible reasons that liberal democracies may be averse to going to war with one another and why the spread of this political system has contributed to the thesis at hand. For one, as simplistic as it may seem, there would seem to be a set of common identities and values that pervade these societies which may make them wary of fighting one another. According to Michael Doyle, liberal democracies typically subscribe to the basic notion that “states have the right to be free from foreign intervention.”66 They have a mutual respect for one another as citizens of the world who are all deserving of the same rights. Liberal democratic societies are also characterized by norms of non-violence and, domestically, tend to avoid resorting to large-scale violence due to institutional structures for redress. As a result, it is arguable that two liberal democratic societies embracing this kind of political culture will take a similar non-violent approach when interacting with one another, choosing to use diplomatic means to solve disputes.67 Moreover, closely tied to the idea of liberal democracy is the idea of secularism. Insofar as religious beliefs triggered many wars of the past, the official separation of church and state would seem to remove a strong motivator for violence from these states’ existing arsenal.68
Prominent security organizations are created with the explicit purpose of deterring and punishing aggression. Article 1 of the UN Charter states that the purpose of the organization is to “maintain international peace and security.” Furthermore, UN Chapter VI states that an attack on one country is considered an attack on all. Similar goals and sentiment are expressed in the charters of regional security organizations, such as the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and Organization of American States (OAS). Many actors may consider appealing to the UN or a regional organization to ease the tension when a military conflict erupts. Not only could the countries involved in the conflict do so themselves, but other members of an IO, particularly the allies or adversaries of the parties, could also take the initiative. Moreover, in the case of the UN, the Secretary-General has the mandate to draw the attention of the Security Council to any matter which in her opinion may threaten international peace and security. When such an appeal does reach the floor of an IO, deliberation and position taking are likely to ensue. What could be achieved by such activities, and how could it be achieved? We argue that the process of institutional deliberation and eventual position taking can transmit important information to the domestic audiences of a country that initiated a military crisis. Thompson (2009, 211) argues that the primary role of the UN in international affairs is to provide politically relevant information, rather than changing countries’ behavior directly through sanctions. The same is likely to be true for regional security organizations as they have even fewer resources and mandate from their member states than the UN. The nature of the information can vary depending on the identity of the receiver. A domestic public would want a leader who can bring good policy outcomes. Such outcomes would require that a leader be competent in choosing a policy that is likely to succeed and be forthcoming about her policy intentions. In particulsar, leaders can have different policy preferences than their publics; thus it is important for domestic audiences to discern whether a policy choice reflects a leader’s private interest or the public interest, in addition to their usual concern about a leader’s competence. The information from IOs during a military crisis can help the public assess both its leader’s competence and her policy intentions. First, deliberation and position taking by an IO during a crisis can reveal international support or opposition of a foreign policy, which may not be expected by the leaders and the public of the country pursuing the policy. During the Suez Crisis in 1956, which broke out when President Nasser of Egypt nationalized the Suez Canal, Britain and France took the initiative to call a meeting of the Security Council before they took military actions against Egypt. They felt that “certain ritual motions must be gone through.” That is, the two countries intended to go through the UN to provide a cover for their military actions and satisfy domestic pressure (Bailey 1990, 126; Kingseed 1995, 76). But the unfolding of the events surprised them. Although they were able to block an unfavorable resolution at the Security Council, the issue nevertheless ended up at an emergency session in the General Assembly and resulted in a resolution that demanded an immediate cease-fire of the Western allies (Bailey 1982b, 579, 612). The resolution put Britain and France in an awkward position in justifying their policy in front of both domestic and international audiences. Second, the deliberation that leads to the final decision of an IO can reveal the intensity of international support or opposition, particularly of those who are the allies of the countries involved. The allies of a dispute initiator may need to bring an issue to an international body to credibly convey its opposition to the action to a world audience. British and French leaders were surprised by the level of intensity with which the United States opposed their use of force through UN deliberation during the Suez Crisis (Bailey 1982b, 612). The prior efforts by the United States to try to resolve the crisis peacefully, including two conferences in London, did not convince them that Eisenhower was serious in his position against military actions by his most important Western allies. In fact, they thought that once they began fighting, the United States would have no choice but to support them (Nichols 2011, 284). Instead, the United States showed its resolve by taking the issue to the UN General Assembly when Britain and France vetoed a resolution in the Security Council. Eisenhower had to go through the UN to reveal his intentions and resolve credibly to Britain and France, as well as to other international actors. 2 Nassar confessed that he had previously believed that the British and French would not embark on a policy that had not been cleared with Eisenhower; after the UN General Assembly resolution, he expressed his appreciation for the U.S. effort and conceded to a U.S. representative that he “had been wrong” (Nichols 2011, 228). More recently, in a similar effort to demonstrate China’s resolve to break with its longtime ally on nuclear issues, the Chinese government joined the United States in sponsoring a UN resolution condemning North Korea’s nuclear test. It is an unusual step taken by China to make its policy position credible to the North Korean leaders, who reacted with surprise and anger. In both cases, the IO served an informational role that cannot be replaced by bilateral diplomacy. Such revelation has implications for the success of a policy and thus informs domestic audiences of their leader’s competence if they can receive the information. While an IO may not have enforcement power by itself, its decision opens the door for member states to exert diplomatic or economic pressure to help ensure that the decision be carried out and coordinate their actions in doing so. After the UN General Assembly resolution during the Suez Crisis, private-market actors and the U.S. government helped initiate a run on the pound that put tremendous strain on Britain’s economy and thus its ability to finance its military actions. When no such means are available from member states to enforce an IO decision, public debate in the IO can still serve “as a demonstration of disapproval, as a form of pressure, or simply to place on record what the sponsor regards as normative international behavior” (Bailey 1982a, 132). On the other hand, even if a military action is successful, lacking international support of the policy would mean that changes brought about by the success are difficult to sustain, because there are parties that actively seek to undermine them. Third, the deliberation in an IO and the position taking by IO members can reveal new information concerning the true policy intentions of a leader, which may not be in line with those of the public. During the UN deliberation on the crisis, Britain put out a number of versions as to why it took military actions. At first, it argued that the ultimatum that the two Western allies sent to Egypt and Israel (with whom they conspired) was to end the initial fighting between Egypt and Israel and to protect the Suez Canal. After their own military actions began on October 31, 1956, the British representative to the UN, Pierson Dixon, argued that the military intervention was to prevent the spread of conflict (Bailey 1982b, 600). Finally, on November 6, when virtually the whole of the UN was against the Tripartite Aggression, the justification was that the British actions were self-defense (Bailey 1982b, 612). The retreat in justifications reflected that the then British Prime minister, Anthony Eden, did not expect that the British public would support his military actions if they were informed of his true policy intention, which was to take back the control of the Canal. 3 Prior to the military actions, he kept in the dark even some of the key Cabinet members he felt would oppose his plan (Kingseed 1995, 84).
The question of whether IOs hold promise for reducing interstate conflict continues to attract attention in international relations research, with the answer having enormous policy implications. Policy makers increasingly turn to IOs to mitigate tensions in the world at a time when unilateralism is seen to be both ineffective and unpopular. The existing empirical evidence suggests that IOs play a preventive role in interstate conflict. What we ask in this study is a complementary question: can IOs have a pacifying effect when a military crisis is already underway and is poised to escalate? Our analysis suggests that the answer is positive, conditional on the degree of regime accountability. It is important to note that either one of the two factors in the causal mechanism alone is not sufficient to bring about the effect: without an IO’s involvement and opposition, a public may not be able to develop a well-informed opinion on which to anchor their pressure on the government, while an IO’s opposition itself lacks an enforcement mechanism. Territorial disputes provide a hard test for our theory, and the fact that we find evidence of IOs reversing the course of military crises on such issues increases our confidence that our theory has broad policy relevance. First, domestic politics provides a source of enforcement for IOs, and therefore, even if an IO does not have the means to enforce its decisions directly, taking a stance against the escalation of a crisis may still be meaningful. Second, because the strength of domestic enforcement varies by regime accountability, IOs can apply external punishment (e.g., economic sanctions) with different degrees of severity, in addition to publicizing the offense committed by a government. More specifically, the international community should generally apply more severe external punishment to a less accountable regime to change its policy. It is no accident that in recent history severe sanctions have been imposed on Iraq, Iran, and North Korea to change the course of their nuclear programs; UN opposition alone has had little effect. One could argue that the interim nuclear deal reached between Iran and the five permanent members of the UNSC in November 2013 was brought about by long-term UN sanctions. These cases suggest that the enforcement capability of IOs is still essential for the set of countries whose domestic publics have little means to constrain their leaders. On the other hand, strategies that can generate domestic pressure, such as persistent public condemnation by an IO, can be more cost efficient in forcing an accountable regime to back down from an aggressive policy. For such a strategy to succeed, domestic audiences must have access to media reports of IO position taking as well as the means to hold their leaders accountable. While these conditions are often associated with democracies, recent development in digital communications opens up the possibility that they are also present in an authoritarian regime. With the speed with which news stories spread on the Internet, for example, an authoritarian regime such as China, where there are 560 million Internet users, can be under increasing public pressure in all aspects of its public policy, including foreign policy. The technological advancement not only makes international news much more accessible to a public, it also reduces the barriers for a large number of individuals to coordinate their opposition to a government’s policy. It is likely, then, the traditional institutional divide between democracies and nondemocracies becomes less important an indicator for regime accountability, and the finding of our study is applicable to a broader range of regime types.
The international society is increasingly interested in importance of' armed conflict prevention in order to avoid or minimize unnecessary damage (Ackermann, 2003). Indeed, many international agents such as the UN, NGOs, and regional organizations maintain efforts and play a major role in field armed conflict prevention. However, there have been several cases that these preventive efforts and actions fail to prevent the outbreak of" armed conflict or unintentionally yield even negative outcomes. Hence, increasing effectiveness of' preventive strategy is one of major issues in conflict prevention. As explored in this article, regional organizations increase the effectiveness of preventative strategy. Although the UN is strong agent for prevention, regional organizations have more strength in timing of action, country context-specific, and coordination of multilateral actions and strategies. Of course, compared with the UN, regional organizations have limitation in capability conducting various strategies and actions and sufficient resources, it can be simply overcame by requesting help. Other international preventive agents such as NGOs, educational institutions, and the media are also important, but have limitation in taking initiative due to lack of political leadership. Therefore, to enhance the effectiveness of preventive strategy, regional organization should take initiative, interacting with other international preventive agents and incorporating their actions. Wedgwood (1996) also emphasized live advantages of regional organizations in conflict management: rapid action; facilitating to build confidence; avoiding to raising unnecessary tensions; preventing misperception among conflict parties; and minimizing mistakes such as condescension or colonialism.
Two things may be said about the realist outlook. First, its premises are accurate. Anarchy remains the defining precept of international relations. Political independence is a condition of conflict and there is much more of it now than there was 100 years ago. Far from creating a global Leviathan capable of smothering all war-like impulses, the twentieth century has seen a quadrupling of the number of independent countries since 1945. Second, in the final decade of this century, a political innovation has appeared that reduces, although it does not eliminate, the insecurity that anarchy produces. That innovation is a system of regulating armaments in Europe, a system that generates the antidote to insecurity: confidence." Armaments are both a cause and a consequence of the insecurity that anarchy creates for all sovereign states. Because they feel insecure, states equip themselves with weapons that in turn make others feel insecure. Even with the purest of benign intentions, no country would be willing to do without any means of self-defence. Total disarmament is thus not possible. But a series of treaties signed at the end of the Cold War and the beginning of the post-Cold War p eriod regulate both nuclear and non-nuclear arms in ways designed to engender confidence throughout Europe that no country harbours aggressive intentions towards any other signatory?'-1 Two features of these treaties convey reassurance. First, the treaties make military forces more suitable for defence than for attack. For nuclear weapons, concentrated in the hands of two countries, the US and Russia, this involves, ironically, ratifying the unchallengeable supremacy of the offence. When the assured capacity to destroy the other side is mutual, it serves as a deterrent against attack. The 1995 Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) Treaty reconfigures military forces on the continent according to the principle of 'defence dominance' by mandating numerical equality and reducing the size of the forces - numerical advantage ordinarily being required for a successful attack - and by limiting the types of weapons on which an attacking force would rely. The second confidence-inspiring feature of the European arms agreements is transparency. Every country in Europe knows which armaments the others have and what each is doing with them. (Limits are set on the scope and frequency of military exercises lest they be used to camouflage actual attacks.) Satellite photography and on-site inspections have turned Europe, where armed forces are concerned, into a larger version of a department store continuously and comprehensively monitored by video cameras to prevent shoplifting.
However, having said this, it is important to note that, in and of itself, the extended absence of major war is a necessary, but not a sufficient, criterion for the obsolescence of major war. In fact, it is arguable that the current absence is not an indication of the institution’s obsolescence, but simply a temporary period of peace within the broader cycle of major war, a cycle linked to the rise and fall of world orders.14 On this view, international stability is tied to the presence of a hegemon that is capable of maintaining order in an anarchic international system due to its economic and military supremacy.15 When such hegemony is challenged by a rising power, this theory asserts that major war is likely to break out as power becomes more equally distributed and the control maintained by the hegemon is lost.16 Thus, just as the hegemonic presence of Great Britain ushered in a period of peace during the nineteenth century, it would seem that the prolonged peace we are currently witnessing may be attributable to the dominance of the United States in the contemporary international system, a dominance that remains open to challenge, particularly by rising powers like China and India. In this sense, instead of indicating its obsolescence, the current absence of major war may simply be a temporary manifestation of American hegemony that will inevitably be challenged and lost in the future, thus continuing the cycle of major war.17
The significance of the current absence of major war cannot be stressed enough. And yet, while significant, it is important to note that the years following the Second World War have not been marked by absolute peace, not even for the great powers. Shortly after the conclusion of the Second World War, the Cold War broke out, a contest between the Soviet Union and the United States that would define the next few decades of history. Although most of the wars fought during this period took place in the Global South, the Soviet Union, the United States, and their respective allies often participated in these battles, providing logistical support or even their own military forces. These proxy wars, wherein powerful countries utilized civil conflicts in the developing world to carry out their aggressions and extend their influence, resulted in indirect engagement among great power forces.21 Thus, although the last half century or so has not witnessed a major war in the proper sense, the great powers have engaged in indirect battles against one another. In the post-Cold War period, proxy wars are no longer a well exercised avenue for great power aggressions, and, as indicated above, in recent years, even the United States and the Soviet Union have undergone notable reductions in the size of their armed forces and the amount of weaponry at their disposal. Yet, in spite of this, many great powers continue to prepare for and engage in war. What is noteworthy, however, is that the wars in which great powers are currently involved seem to fundamentally differ from those of the past. No longer do such wars seem to be primarily about expanding territory or influence, nor are they fought between great powers. Rather, these wars now seem to be generally motivated by humanitarian concerns, taking the form of collective operations sanctioned by multilateral institutions that aim to ensure the stability of developing countries wrought by violence.22 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s (NATO) efforts in Kosovo in 1999 and, more recently, in Afghanistan would seem indicative of such forms of intervention, with many great powers working together to protect human rights and promote human security worldwide. To be sure, such protection is more necessary now than ever before as less conventional forms of violence, such as terrorism, have begun to flourish.23 Ultimately, although the great powers are still engaged in war, such aggressions are no longer targeted at one another, nor do they appear to be aggressions in the proper sense. It would seem that their engagement in battle has undergone an evolution away from major war to humanitarian interventions, an evolution that can be tied to the shifting perceptions of war among populations in the developed world.Indeed, beyond analyses as to the frequency of major war, further support for the obsolescence of this institution can be found in a shift towards a non-militaristic political psychology.24 Evidenced not only by the reductions in military preparedness worldwide, but also by cultural and political trends, this shift would seem to be cementing in the developed world, particularly among the great powers whose behaviour is our primary concern.
Assured mutual destruction has limited recent skirmishes to proxy battles. Next year will be the seventieth anniversary of the end of the last global conflict. There have been points on that timeline — such as the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, and a Soviet computer malfunction in 1983 that erroneously suggested that the U.S. had attacked, and perhaps even the Kosovo War in 1999 — when a global conflict was a real possibility. Yet today — in the shadow of a flare up which some are calling a new Cold War between Russia and the U.S. — I believe the threat of World War III has almost faded into nothingness. That is, the probability of a world war is the lowest it has been in decades, and perhaps the lowest it has ever been since the dawn of modernity.
One fundamental problem with genocide prevention is that it cannot be tested and results definitively proved. It can only be hypothetically asserted that a step taken against a serious breach of human rights today may, perhaps, thwart a genocide five years down the road. Terminating violence well before it erupts is an entirely different ball game. Since there is no window to the future, all interventions claiming to have halted a process heading towards genocide are mere speculations and will remain so unless one accepts that we live in deterministic/predictable world. As long as the future remains a tabula rasa until it becomes the present, prevention amounts to little more than a serious guessing game. Who is prepared to say he/she saw genocide in the about to disintegrate Yugoslavia? What were the concrete and indisputable symptoms of an impending crisis? As far as the profession of genocide studies is concerned, primary emphasis should be on research of actual or near genocides and not on that which inherently - with few exceptions - is unknowable, no matter how sophisticated the methodology of prediction. In a lecture on genocide prediction held at Yale four years ago, this writer concluded there can be no common denominator for all genocides allowing for a common methodology of prediction. There are, in other words, no hard and fast early warning signals except for vague generalities that may and, more likely, may not lead to an escalation in the direction of genocide. A primary purpose of Genocide Studies is, of course, the hope that policy makers will be assisted by the insights of researchers. But theirs is to be activists, the opposite mindset of disinterested scholarship. The two - research and public policy - must be carefully kept distinct. Their blurring leads to scholar-activists, a slippery slope to polemics and the loss of credibility. It is a position held by Genocide Research, a stance that clearly and unambiguously distinguishes it from other journals dealing with genocide but tempted to opening the door to partisan prescriptions.
The critical need to address the systemic issues that contribute to conflict and, in certain cases, to genocide If there is to be any hope of preventing genocide (versus intervening after a genocide has already begun), then it is crucial for intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations, individual governments, policymakers, and scholars to address the underlying root causes of human rights infractions that often serve as catalysts to mass violence—and, in certain cases, genocide. In other words, sincere efforts and real progress must be made in undertaking key structural changes that address those factors underlying violent conflict. Not to do so is bound to result in situations where the international community is “condemned” to reacting to grave crises already under way in which hundreds, thousands and tens of thousands or more may have already been killed. Among some of the many issues that need to be addressed—and the earlier the better—are: racism; rabid or racial anti-Semitism; other types of extreme prejudice and/or discrimination that “marks” a particular group of people as “other” international and/or national economic policies that exacerbate social tensions and fuel conflict (including harmful economic inequalities); and scarcity of resources (land, food, water, energy, etc.) and/or over-population, which, in turn, exacerbates the former. Each and every one of these problems is complex, and will require in-depth study in order to address them in an effective manner. To neglect them entirely, to address them in a piecemeal fashion, or to attempt to “patch” them with a band-aid approach is tantamount to inviting genocide to rear its ugly face yet again.
New Delhi: India today said it remains committed to building peaceful and friendly ties with Pakistan and expects it to abide by the commitment to prevent its territory and territory under its control from being used for terrorism against India.
WASHINGTON - Pakistan is pursuing policy of promoting peaceful relations with all neighboring countries including Afghanistan and India and wants to resolve all outstanding issues with New Delhi through dialogue, Tariq Fatemi, Special Assistant to Prime Minister, said.
DELHI – India’s Minister for Commerce and Industry Nirmala Sitharaman will discuss a new roadmap for trade liberalization with Pakistani Federal Minister for Commerce Khurram Dastgir Khan next month.
But those negatives apparently aren’t enough to prevent Washington from considering calling Iran a potential partner in the battle against a group of al Qaida-inspired militants who are trying to overtake Iraq. Washington and the Shiite Muslim-led government in Tehran find themselves on the same side in defending the Shiite-dominated government of Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al Maliki against the assault from the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, a Sunni Muslim insurgent group that’s quickly and violently gained control of swaths of Iraq. With options limited, the combination of crisis and mutual interest might make possible what many foreign policy experts once thought unthinkable: that the U.S. and Iran, archenemies since the taking of 50 hostages at the U.S. embassy in Tehran in 1979, become partners, frenemies for the sake of Iraq. “It may be an unholy alliance to some folks but countries don’t have allies, they have interests,” said retired U.S. Army Maj. Gen. Paul Eaton, a senior adviser at the National Security Network, a liberal research center. “And in this case, Iran is a natural ally of the U.S. They want a stable country around them, and that’s what we want. From a purely realpolitik, Kissinger view of the world, we may have some strange bedfellows here.” The White House apparently thinks so, too. Deputy Secretary of State William Burns discussed the Iraq situation last week with Iranian officials on the sidelines of a meeting in Vienna on Iran’s nuclear program. President Barack Obama, in announcing the deployment of 300 advisers to Iraq last week and holding out the possibility of airstrikes, noted that Iran “can play a constructive role if it is helping to send the same message to the Iraqi government that we’re sending, which is that Iraq only holds together . . . if the interests of Sunni, Shia and Kurds are all respected.”
If Iran were to attack Israel, or, say, one of its Arab neighbours, international law is clear: the victim has the right to retaliate. But such an attack is highly improbable. Under Article 42 of the UN Charter, the Security Council can authorise military action where there’s a “threat to international peace and security”. Such resolutions were the legal basis for the actions against Iraq in 1991 and 2003, and Libya in 2011. But there are no such Article 42 resolutions against Iran; and there won’t be – China and Russia would veto them.¶  There are Security Council resolutions against Iran under Article 41, but this Article explicitly excludes measures involving the use of force. These resolutions have progressively tightened international sanctions against Iran, because of its lack of full co-operation with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). With even tougher measures imposed by the US and the EU, sanctions have severely restricted Iran’s international trade, and led to the collapse of its currency, and high inflation.
That’s right: the claim that America or Israel is on the cusp of attacking Iran is as old as the Islamic Republic itself. Such assertions have peppered media reports, op-eds, and other commentary for three decades and change at this point – a fact which should give folks pause about taking such claims any more seriously now than at any point in recent history.¶ Yes, Iran is hostile to the U.S. and its interests, and yes, it is almost certainly working as quickly as it can on the development of a nuclear weapon. However, despite growing hysteria on the part of media and analysts, and despite public debates like that being hosted by Foreign Affairs (the best piece among which is this one by Colin Kahl, former head of Middle East policy at the Pentagon), a western-initiated war with Iran is little more likely now than at any point in the last three decades, if not altogether less so.¶ This isn’t to minimize Iran’s nuclearization effort as an issue. President Obama clearly has a decision to make when it comes to dealing with Iran’s apparently inexorable march toward becoming a nuclear weapons state, as will the next president should Obama be defeated in this year’s election. Thus far, the administration has issued firm statements while consistently moving its “red line” of acceptable nuclear progress backward in response to each Iranian action. As Pepe Escobar noted at CBSNews Online:¶ Let’s start with red lines. Here it is, Washington’s ultimate red line, straight from the lion’s mouth. Only last week Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta said of the Iranians, ‘Are they trying to develop a nuclear weapon? No. But we know that they’re trying to develop a nuclear capability. And that’s what concerns us. And our red line to Iran is do not develop a nuclear weapon. That’s a red line for us.’¶ How strange, the way those red lines continue to retreat. Once upon a time, the red line for Washington was “enrichment” of uranium [Auth. note: As Olli Heinonen has recently noted, the Fordow plant is currently producing 20% enriched uranium – an important step in producing weapons-grade uranium] . Now, it’s evidently an actual nuclear weapon that can be brandished. Keep in mind that, since 2005, Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei has stressed that his country is not seeking to build a nuclear weapon. The most recent National Intelligence Estimate on Iran from the U.S. Intelligence Community has similarly stressed that Iran is not, in fact, developing a nuclear weapon (as opposed to the breakout capacity to build one someday).¶ Why does the standard U.S. response to Iran’s advancement past each impassable line-in-the-sand ultimatum appear to be to shrug, take ten more paces backward, draw a new line, and demand that Iran not cross that one? The two-fold answer to that is as simple as it is frustrating for those who prioritize non-proliferation (particularly to state supporters of terror like Iran) very highly.¶ First, it is highly unlikely that an aerial campaign would be able to successfully eliminate Iran’s nuclear program, which is made up of deeply buried, hardened targets spread across multiple sites (though Matthew Kroenig has argued in Foreign Affairs that the majority of sites that serve as the most critical targets are within reach of conventional airborne munitions). Further, attempting to strike these sites would have a net negative effect on the U.S.’s interests; as President Bush’s Director of Central Intelligence Michael Hayden reiterated just this week,“ When we talked about this in the government, the consensus was that [attacking Iran] would guarantee that which we are trying to prevent — an Iran that will spare nothing to build a nuclear weapon and that would build it in secret.” A certain effect of striking or even eliminating the program (if that were possible) but leaving the regime intact would be to double their resolve to establish a nuclear weapons capability, in no small part because success in that pursuit would provide it the security of deterrence (and the freedom to continue its effort to be a bully in the region and beyond), as North Korea has repeatedly demonstrated.¶ Given these limitations and first-order effects, the next-best option would seem to be to carry out an operation that simultaneously eliminated Teheran’s nuclear sites and deposed the regime. This is akin to what FPI’s Jamie Fly and AEI’s Gary Schmitt have suggested, with one major difference: Fly and Schmitt appear to be calling for an solely aerial campaign (augmented, almost certainly, by other conventional standoff weaponry), but with a target list that is expanded beyond sites that are directly related to the nuclear program. They write:¶ A limited strike against nuclear facilities would not lead to regime change. But a broader operation might. It would not even need to be a ground invasion aimed specifically at toppling the government. The United States would basically need to expand its list of targets beyond the nuclear program to key command and control elements of the Republican Guard and the intelligence ministry, and facilities associated with other key government officials. The goal would be to compromise severely the government’s ability to control the Iranian population. This would require an extended campaign, but since even a limited strike would take days and Iran would strike back, it would be far better to design a military operation that has a greater chance of producing a satisfactory outcome.¶ With all due respect to Fly and Schmitt, it’s a very good thing that this suggestion will never come to fruition, in large part because it is one of the worst suggestions that has been put forth to date for dealing with the Iranian nuclear issue. If simply bombing those sites which can be identified and reached with conventional weapons is an ineffective way of dealing with Iran’s program, then attacking those sites and striking Teheran’s “key command and control elements” from 30,000 feet AGL or from up to 1,000 nautical miles away, then leaving the resulting chaotic mess for the Iranian people (and those still remaining in the military- governmental complex) to clean up and rebuild from is an exponentially more effective way of ensuring that whatever does emerge from the rubble will not in any way be positively disposed to the U.S. and its interests. In other words, the idea that the best possible option on Iran would be to fly in, break everything (in hopes of prompting regime collapse), and then immediately leave is, quite simply, mind-boggling.¶ This brings us to the second reason why an attack on Iran is as unlikely now as it has been at any time in recent history, if not more: the fact that the only option to truly ensure that the existing program is done away with, and to create the most favorable odds that Iran’s efforts at nuclearization would not be reconstituted in greater secrecy at the earliest possible moment, would be to mount an air-and-ground invasion that deposed the regime; disbanded the Revolutionary Guard; and manually searched for; reported, and destroyed all weapons of mass destruction and WMD production facilities that it found; and trusted that freeing the people from the tyranny of their government and the punishment it had brought, and meted out, upon them would immediately win them to America’s side and its cause.¶ Does that sound familiar? If not, then George Santayana would like to have a quick word with you, because I’ve just basically described the 2003 coalition invasion of Iraq, and that is precisely why no such invasion of Iran is in the offing at any time in the near future. Had America not had the experience of “breaking” Iraq, and learning the hard way just how difficult it is to put such a Humpty Dumpty together again, then a campaign against Iran might not be such a far-fetched idea. However, with Iraq planted firmly in our short-term memory (despite the withdrawal of uniformed troops this December, that effort is still far from over), and with Afghanistan still so unstable that the coalition is once again stepping up peace and power-sharing talks with the Taliban, the simple and unavoidable fact is that there will not be even a fraction of the public, expert, or official governmental support for an invasion of Iran that there was for the action taken against Afghanistan and Iraq last decade. Additionally, Iran’s geographic location virtually guarantees that militants will stream into the Persian state from every direction in massive numbers, augmenting an organic insurgency and waging a low- and medium-intensity conflict and domestic terror campaign that could well make both Afghanistan and Iraq seem relatively tame in comparison.¶ These facts argue very convincingly for the risk of an attack on Iran being as low as it has been for the preceding decades, despite the constant media speculation and hype about a supposedly impending attack that has been a feature of reports and analyses across that period.
Yet, the Saudis, Iranians, Jordanians, Syrians, and others are very unlikely to go to war either to protect their own sect or ethnic group or to prevent one country from gaining the upper hand in Iraq.
Having admitted, however, that the odds of a military success in Iraq are almost impossibly long, Chaos Hawks nonetheless insist that the U.S. military needs to stay in Iraq for the foreseeable future. Why? Because if we leave the entire Middle East will become a bloodbath. Sunni and Shiite will engage in mutual genocide, oil fields will go up in flames, fundamentalist parties will take over, and al-Qaeda will have a safe haven bigger than the entire continent of Europe.
WASHINGTON — Secretary of State John Kerry is heading back to the Middle East as the Obama administration attempts to bolster regional efforts to reach a ceasefire and sharpens its criticism of Hamas in its conflict with Israel.
The current clashes between the Saudi security forces and the Houthi rebels who have infiltrated Saudi Arabia from Yemen have intensified the steadily escalating conflict between Iran and Saudi Arabia, which is part of the cold war in the Middle East between the pro-Saudi camp and the pro-Iranian camp. Saudi Arabia and Yemen accuse Iran of encouraging, training, funding, and arming the Houthi rebels. Iran's goals, they claim, are to increase its regional influence and to undermine their stability and security, and perhaps also to gain a safe sea route to Sudan and northward. Articles in Saudi and Yemeni dailies called the Houthis "Iranian agents," and argued that they, like Hizbullah, are selling their blood and their land in order to further Iran's interests. The dailies claimed that Iran is stirring up conflicts in Sunni countries as part of its efforts to export its revolution, and called on these countries to retaliate by encouraging Sunni insurgency in Iran. Since the outbreak of the clashes, Saudi Arabia has enjoyed broad support from Arab countries, including even countries belonging to the pro-Iranian camp, which could indicate the beginning of a change in their orientation. For example, Syria condemned the "infringement on the territorial integrity of Saudi Arabia" and supported "its legitimate right to defend its sovereignty and its territory." [1] Solidarity with Saudi Arabia was also expressed at a conference of the Gulf Cooperation Council, held in Qatar. [2] The Saudi-Iranian tension also intensified lately on the religious level, in the wake of some recent statements by Iranian Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei and Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad relating to the upcoming Hajj celebrations in Saudi Arabia. These were perceived by the Saudis as inciting against Saudi Arabia and threatening it, and as having the potential to spark political riots similar to the July 1987 clashes between Iranian pilgrims and the Saudi security forces. Voices in Saudi Arabia protested that Iran was trying to exploit the religious festival for political purposes and even to sabotage it in order to tarnish Saudi Arabia's reputation and undermine its standing as the Custodian of the Two Holy Places.
Most of this is bunk, and nearly all of it has focused on the wrong lessons for policy. Classic resource wars are good material for Hollywood screenwriters. They rarely occur in the real world. To be sure, resource money can magnify and prolong some conflicts, but the root causes of those hostilities usually lie elsewhere. Fixing them requires focusing on the underlying institutions that govern how resources are used and largely determine whether stress explodes into violence. When conflicts do arise, the weak link isn’t a dearth in resources but a dearth in governance.¶ Resource Wars are largely back in vogue within the U.S. threat industry because of China’s spectacular rise. Brazil, India, Malaysia and many others that used to sit on the periphery of the world economy are also arcing upward. This growth is fueling a surge in world demand for raw materials. Inevitably, these countries have looked overseas for what they need, which has animated fears of a coming clash with China and other growing powers over access to natural resources.
The sweep of history points against classic resource wars. Whereas colonialism created long, oppressive and often war-prone supply chains for resources such as oil and rubber, most resources today are fungible commodities. That means it is almost always cheaper and more reliable to buy them in markets.¶ At the same time, much higher expectations must be placed on China to tame the pernicious effects of its recent efforts to secure special access to natural resources. Sudan, Chad and Zimbabwe are three particularly acute examples where Chinese (and in Sudan’s case, Indian) government investments, sheltered under a foreign-policy umbrella, have caused harm by rewarding abusive governments. That list will grow the more insecure China feels about its ability to source vital energy and mineral supplies. Some of what is needed is patience because these troubles will abate as China itself realizes that going out is an expensive strategy that buys little in security. Chinese state oil companies are generally well-run organizations; as they are forced to pay the real costs of capital and to compete in the marketplace, they won’t engage in these strategies. The best analog is Brazil’s experience, where its state-controlled oil company has become ever smarter—and more market oriented—as the Brazilian government has forced it to operate at arm’s length without special favors. That has not only allowed Petrobras to perform better, but it has also made Brazil’s energy markets function better and with higher security.
Yet there is a strong and deep academic literature, that draws on extensive interdisciplinary evidence from economics, political science, anthropology and history, which shows how simplistic and misguided such arguments about “resource wars” are, both when approached theoretically and through Asian or African case studies. Both historically and contemporarirly, growing resource scarcity does not tend to lead to conflict but to cooperation, even (or perhaps especially) in regions like the Middle East and the Horn of Africa. Moreover, the idea that wars are caused by exogenous environmental triggers — as opposed to endogenous political-economic drivers — has always been very convenient for powerful groups who try to depolicitise asymmetries in power and wealth and argue that scarcity is not man-made but really an Act of God that we can’t or shouldn’t contest.¶ Moyo is similarly simplistic about China, presenting the country as a largely monolithic actor that thinks with one mind and has one purpose. In her latest book, Winner Takes All, there is little discussion of the intense rivalry between different factions within the Chinese Communist Party and the impact this has on foreign and economic policy; there was also little discussion of other key faultlines — federal government vs. regional players, state-owned enteprises competing among themselves, as well as against purely private actors — that explain why it is unhelpful to generalise and see everything through a “One China” lens. Such broad brushstrokes overstate the degree of coherence in Chinese policy, particularly vis-à-vis Africa, and offer little in terms of opportunities for policy engagement with different Chinese actors.
Rising energy prices and mounting concerns about environmental depletion have animated fears that the world may be headed for a spate of "resource wars" - hot conflicts triggered by a struggle to grab valuable resources. Such fears come in many stripes, but the threat industry has sounded the alarm bells especially loudly in three areas.
Much of the existing empirical work on the resource scarcity–conflict nexus relies on qualitative studies of specific countries or regions (e.g. Homer-Dixon, 1994, 1999; Percival & Homer-Dixon, 1998; Bächler et al., 1996; Kahl, 2008; Brown, 2010). This research identifies various cases in which resource scarcity seems to have contributed to violent conflict, mostly at local or national levels. However, social, economic, and political conditions, which may also affect conflict besides resource scarcity, vary considerably between different types of resources as well as areas of the world. Case studies of specific countries or regions can hardly account for these different conditions, and it is therefore difficult to generalize their results. Hence, we concentrate on the recent large-N research in the remainder of this section, and structure the discussion according to conflict types, that is, interstate vs. intrastate conflict and the kind of resource under study. First, with regard to interstate conflict, extant quantitative work almost exclusively focuses on one specific type of renewable resource, namely water. Empirical analyses in this context suggest that states tend to cooperate rather than fight over shared water resources (Dinar et al., 2007; Brochmann, 2012) and that institutionalized agreements can reduce dispute risk (Zawahri & Mitchell, 2011; Tir & Stinnett, 2012). The theoretical underpinning of much of this research is that joint democracy and/or international water management institutions facilitate cooperative solutions to water problems even in situations of scarcity. Furthermore, side-payments, issue linkages, or economic and political ties between countries also prevent interstate conflict over water. While scholars do not fully rule out conflict over scarce water resources, they find that if conflict materializes then it occurs in the form of disputes and political tensions, but not in the form of armed hostilities or even ‘water wars’ (e.g. Gledisch & Hegre, 2000; Gleditsch et al., 2006; Hensel, Mitchell & Sowers, 2006; Brochmann & Hensel, 2009; Dinar, 2009). Second, with regard to intrastate conflict, quantitative studies examining the effects of resource scarcity have generated a wide range of empirical findings, which, however, do not allow for a clearcut conclusion. For example, Hauge & Ellingsen (1998) find that land degradation, freshwater scarcity, and deforestation all have positive and significant effects on the incidence of armed conflict (see also Raleigh & Urdal, 2007; Gizelis & Wooden, 2010). Theisen (2008), however, shows – more convincingly than Hauge & Ellingsen (1998) – that only very high levels of land degradation increase civil conflict risk, while water scarcity has no effect at all. In contrast, Hendrix & Glaser (2007) report that land degradation has no impact, whereas more water per capita actually increases the risk of civil conflict in sub-Saharan Africa. Urdal (2005, 2008) finds that a combination of land scarcity and high rates of population growth increases the risk of civil conflict to some extent, and that scarcity of agriculturally productive land is positively correlated with civil conflict when agricultural wages decline. Østby et al. (2011) do not obtain evidence for an effect of land pressure on violence in Indonesian provinces. Similarly, Theisen (2012) does not find that land pressure affects civil conflict in Kenya. Finally, Meier, Bond & Bond (2007) report that increased vegetation rather than scarcity is positively associated with the incidence of organized raids. In sum, this lack of robust statistical evidence supporting the scarcity argument led Theisen (2008: 810) to conclude that ‘scarcity of natural resources has limited explanatory power in terms of civil violence’. We tend to share this assessment and Table I gives an overview of the different studies discussed in the previous paragraphs. As demonstrated there, quantitative research on the link between renewable resources and conflict does not provide robust evidence for the claim that resource scarcity leads to intra- or interstate conflict. Some large-N findings even strongly contradict common findings of earlier qualitative case studies. Essentially, these results point to a more complex relationship between resource scarcity and conflict than most resource scarcity theorists currently envision.
Most importantly, China’s going-out strategy is unlikely to spur resource wars because it simply does not work, a lesson the Chinese are learning. Oil is a fungible commodity, and when it is sourced far from China it is better to sell (and buy) the oil on the world market. The best estimates suggest that only about one-tenth of the oil produced overseas by Chinese investments (so-called “equity oil”) actually makes it back to the country. So, thus far, the largest beneficiaries of China’s strategy are the rest of the world’s oil consumers—first and foremost the United States—who gain because China subsidizes production.¶ Until recently, the strategy of going out for oil looked like a good bet for China’s interests. But, despite threat-industry fear-mongering, we need not worry that it will continue over the long term because Chinese enterprises are already poised to follow a new strategy that is less likely to engender conflict. The past strategy rested on a trifecta of passing fads. One fad was the special access that Chinese state enterprises had to cheap capital from the government and by retaining their earnings. The ability to direct that spigot to political projects is diminishing as China engages in reforms that expose state enterprises to the real cost of capital and as the Chinese state and its enterprises look for better commercial returns on the money they invest. Second, nearly all the equity-oil investments overseas have occurred since the late 1990s, as prices have been rising. Each has looked much smarter than the last because of the surging value of oil in the ground. But that trend is slowing in many places because the cost of discovering and developing oil resources is rising.¶ And the third passing fad in China’s going-out strategy is the fiction that China can cut special deals—such as by channeling development assistance to pliable host governments—to confer a durable advantage for Chinese companies. While there is no question that the special deals are rampant—by some measures, most of China’s foreign assistance is actually tied to natural-resources projects—the Chinese government and its overseas enterprises are learning that it is best to avoid these places for the long haul. Among the special havens where Chinese companies toil are Sudan, Nigeria, Chad, Iran and Zimbabwe—all countries where even Chinese firms find it hard to assure adequate stability to reliably extract natural resources.¶ As China grapples with these hard truths about going out, the strategy will come unstuck. It won’t happen overnight, but evidence in this direction is encouraging. China already pursues the opposite strategy—seeking reliable hosts, multiple commercial partners and market-oriented contracts—when it secures natural resources that require technical sophistication. China’s first supplies of imported natural gas, which started last year at a liquefied natural gas terminal in Shenzhen, came from blue-chip investments in Australia, governed by contracts and investments with major Western companies. With time, China will shift to such arrangements and away from the armpits of governance. At best, badly governed countries are mediocre hosts for projects that export bulk commodities, such as iron ore and raw crude oil. These projects, however, are least likely to engender zero-sum conflicts over resources because it is particularly difficult to corner the market for widely traded commodities, as China has learned with its equity-oil projects. Resources that require technical sophistication to develop tend to favor integration and stability, rather than a zero-sum struggle.
As we see, what matters is not just money but how it is used. While Al-Qaeda conjures images of an oil-funded network—because it hails from the resource-rich Middle East and its seed capital has oily origins—other lethal terror networks, such as Sri Lanka’s Tamil Tigers and Ireland’s Republican Army, arose with funding from diasporas rather than oil or other natural resources. Unlike modern state armies that require huge infusions of capital, terror networks are usually organized to make the most of scant funds. During the run-up in oil and gas prices, analysts have often claimed that these revenues will go to fund terror networks; yet it is sobering to remember that Al-Qaeda came out in the late 1990s, when oil earnings were at their lowest in recent history. Most of the tiny sums of money needed for the September 11 attacks came from that period. Al-Qaeda’s daring attacks against the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania occurred when oil-rich patrons were fretting about the inability to make ends meet at home because revenues were so low. Ideology and organization trump money as driving forces for terrorism.
The West must understand that, to Russia, Ukraine can never be just a foreign country. Russian history began in what was called Kievan-Rus. The Russian religion spread from there. Ukraine has been part of Russia for centuries, and their histories were intertwined before then. Some of the most important battles for Russian freedom, starting with the Battle of Poltava in 1709, were fought on Ukrainian soil. The Black Sea Fleet — Russia’s means of projecting power in the Mediterranean — is based by long-term lease in Sevastopol, in Crimea. Even such famed dissidents as Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and Joseph Brodsky insisted that Ukraine was an integral part of Russian history and, indeed, of Russia. The European Union must recognize that its bureaucratic dilatoriness and subordination of the strategic element to domestic politics in negotiating Ukraine’s relationship to Europe contributed to turning a negotiation into a crisis. Foreign policy is the art of establishing priorities. The Ukrainians are the decisive element. They live in a country with a complex history and a polyglot composition. The Western part was incorporated into the Soviet Union in 1939 , when Stalin and Hitler divided up the spoils. Crimea, 60 percent of whose population is Russian , became part of Ukraine only in 1954 , when Nikita Khrushchev, a Ukrainian by birth, awarded it as part of the 300th-year celebration of a Russian agreement with the Cossacks. The west is largely Catholic; the east largely Russian Orthodox. The west speaks Ukrainian; the east speaks mostly Russian. Any attempt by one wing of Ukraine to dominate the other — as has been the pattern — would lead eventually to civil war or break up. To treat Ukraine as part of an East-West confrontation would scuttle for decades any prospect to bring Russia and the West — especially Russia and Europe — into a cooperative international system. Ukraine has been independent for only 23 years; it had previously been under some kind of foreign rule since the 14th century. Not surprisingly, its leaders have not learned the art of compromise, even less of historical perspective. The politics of post-independence Ukraine clearly demonstrates that the root of the problem lies in efforts by Ukrainian politicians to impose their will on recalcitrant parts of the country, first by one faction, then by the other. That is the essence of the conflict between Viktor Yanu­kovych and his principal political rival, Yulia Tymo­shenko. They represent the two wings of Ukraine and have not been willing to share power. A wise U.S. policy toward Ukraine would seek a way for the two parts of the country to cooperate with each other. We should seek reconciliation, not the domination of a faction. Russia and the West, and least of all the various factions in Ukraine, have not acted on this principle. Each has made the situation worse. Russia would not be able to impose a military solution without isolating itself at a time when many of its borders are already precarious. For the West, the demonization of Vladimir Putin is not a policy; it is an alibi for the absence of one. Putin should come to realize that, whatever his grievances, a policy of military impositions would produce another Cold War. For its part, the United States needs to avoid treating Russia as an aberrant to be patiently taught rules of conduct established by Washington. Putin is a serious strategist — on the premises of Russian history. Understanding U.S. values and psychology are not his strong suits. Nor has understanding Russian history and psychology been a strong point of U.S. policymakers. Leaders of all sides should return to examining outcomes, not compete in posturing. Here is my notion of an outcome compatible with the values and security interests of all sides: 1. Ukraine should have the right to choose freely its economic and political associations, including with Europe. 2. Ukraine should not join NATO, a position I took seven years ago, when it last came up. 3. Ukraine should be free to create any government compatible with the expressed will of its people. Wise Ukrainian leaders would then opt for a policy of reconciliation between the various parts of their country. Internationally, they should pursue a posture comparable to that of Finland. That nation leaves no doubt about its fierce independence and cooperates with the West in most fields but carefully avoids institutional hostility toward Russia. 4. It is incompatible with the rules of the existing world order for Russia to annex Crimea. But it should be possible to put Crimea’s relationship to Ukraine on a less fraught basis. To that end, Russia would recognize Ukraine’s sovereignty over Crimea. Ukraine should reinforce Crimea’s autonomy in elections held in the presence of international observers. The process would include removing any ambiguities about the status of the Black Sea Fleet at Sevastopol.
“We are not going to be getting into a military excursion in Ukraine,” the president said in an interview with NBC’s San Diego affiliate, KNSD, one of several he did Wednesday. “What we are going to do is mobilize all of our diplomatic resources to make sure that we’ve got a strong international coalition that sends a clear message, which is that Ukraine should decide their destiny.” …¶ Obama said that he sees Russian President Vladimir Putin acting “out of weakness, not out of strength” in attempting to take control of Crimea. Putin, the president said, is “not comfortable” with former members of the Soviet Union making moves to align themselves with the West.¶ In another interview, with St. Louis NBC affiliate KSDK, Obama also said that a military option is not on the table.¶ “Obviously, you know, we do not need to trigger an actual war with Russia,” he said. “The Ukrainians don’t want that. Nobody would want that.”¶ Politifact would rate this as true, because literally no one wants that. That’s not a Bidenesque literally, but a literal literally. No one wants it, no one would approve it, and for a couple of really good reasons — we have no national interest in who governs Crimea, and an attempt to start a war there would make Dieppe look well-considered. It’s in the Russian’s back yard.¶  So why bother saying it at all? That’s the curious aspect of this. Obama has an annoying habit of attempting to present his critics’ arguments in his own fantasy reductio ad absurdum constructs that end up bearing no resemblance to the actual criticisms, all to paint himself as the voice of centrist reason. This, however, just makes him look as out of touch as the rest of his foreign policy — with an extra added dollop of weakness as the a la mode touch.¶ Paul Mirengoff calls this a “false choice,” and a bad signal to send:¶ In ruling out military action, Obama explained that “the Ukrainians don’t want [an actual war with Russia], nobody would want that.” But if Russia continues to devour their country, the Ukrainians are no less likely to want a war than any of Russia’s other neighbors or former client states would be under similar circumstances.¶ Accordingly, Obama’s statement can be read by Russia as ruling out any U.S. military to stop any future aggression within the former Soviet Union and perhaps within its entire former sphere of influence. Perhaps Obama would have been better advised not to have made this statement.¶ The other problem with the statement is that, to use Obama’s former pet phrase, it presents us with a false choice. America’s options aren’t limited to taking military action and “mobilizing diplomatic resources to send a clear message.”¶ We could, for example, provide weapons and ammunition to Ukraine. Ukraine could then decide whether to use them in the event of further Russian aggression. Ukraine has, in fact, requested weapons and ammunition, but Obama turned down the request.¶ I suspect we have not supplied Ukraine with weapons because we want to diminish the prospect of Ukrainian resistance in the event Russia moves into Eastern Ukraine (which Russia seems at least as likely as not to do). Ukrainian resistance is not in Obama’s interest, as he likely sees it, because the resulting bloodbath would further embarrass his administration.¶ And that question may become acute quickly. NATO’s top concern at the moment is that Vladimir Putin won’t stop at Crimea, Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen told Foreign Policy’s Yochi Dreazen:¶ NATO’s top official acknowledged in an interview that Russia’s annexation of Crimea had “established certain facts on the ground” that would be difficult to change and said the military alliance was increasingly concerned that Moscow might also invade eastern Ukraine.
Russia is far more exposed to market fluctuations than many countries, since it owns a majority stake in a number of the country’s largest companies. Gazprom, the energy concern that is Russia’s largest company by market capitalization, is majority-owned by the Russian Federation. At the same time, Gazprom’s shares are listed on the London stock exchange and are traded over the counter as American depositary receipts in the United States as well as on the Berlin and Paris exchanges. Over half of its shareholders are American, according to J. P. Morgan Securities. And the custodian bank for its depository receipts is the Bank of New York Mellon.
In particular, Russia is likely to be highly vulnerable to financial sanctions. One month ago, the Western discussion on possible sanctions against Russia focused on whether they could be effective. During the spring meeting of the International Monetary Fund in Washington April 12 to 13, the question was turned around: Do we really want to destroy Russia that fast? The dominant theme was that geopolitical risk is back, and Russia is seen as the main risk.
The United States has denounced the Russian involvement in Crimea as “a brazen military incursion“ and its annexation of the territory as "nothing more than a land grab” by Moscow. In the pre-referendum phase of Crimea,Washington adopted a tough posture, sending 12 F-16 fighters and 300 military personnel to Poland for joint NATO training.
Moscow is willing to renew the mutual cooperation with the US in the fight against the international terrorism, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov. "Us and Americans had a fairly effective bilateral mechanism that linked various agencies involved in counterterrorist operations. Since last year this mechanism was suspended by our American colleagues, and now we feel their eagerness to resume the antiterrorism cooperation. We’re ready for that, it’s up to our American colleagues now," Lavrov said.
GRABOVE – Russian President Vladimir Putin has promised to cooperate with outraged world leaders seeking access to the site of downed flight MH17, after Washington squarely pointed the finger of blame at Moscow for the crash.
Russian troops pour over a border. An autocratic Russian leader blames the United States and unspecified “radicals and nationalists” for meddling. A puppet leader pledges fealty to Moscow. It’s no wonder the crisis in Ukraine this week drew comparisons to Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968 or that a chorus of pundits proclaimed the re-emergence of the Cold War. But there’s at least one major difference between then and now: Moscow has a stock market. Under the autocratic grip of President Vladimir Putin, Russia may be a democracy in name only, but the gyrations of the Moscow stock exchange provided a minute-by-minute referendum on his military and diplomatic actions. On Monday, the Russian stock market index, the RTSI, fell more than 12 percent, in what a Russian official called panic selling. The plunge wiped out nearly $60 billion in asset value — more than the exorbitant cost of the Sochi Olympics. The ruble plunged on currency markets, forcing the Russian central bank to raise interest rates by one and a half percentage points to defend the currency. Mr. Putin “seems to have stopped a potential invasion of Eastern Ukraine because the RTS index slumped by 12 percent” on Monday, said Anders Aslund, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington. On Tuesday, as soon as Mr. Putin said he saw no need for further Russian military intervention, the Russian market rebounded by 6 percent. With tensions on the rise once more on Friday, the Russian market may again gyrate when it opens on Monday. Mr. Putin seems to be “following the old Soviet playbook,” in Ukraine, Strobe Talbott, an expert on the history of the Cold War, told me this week. “But back then, there was no concern about what would happen to the Soviet stock market. If, in fact, Putin is cooling his jets and might even blink, it’s probably because of rising concern about the price Russia would have to pay.” Mr. Talbott is the president of the Brookings Institution, a former ambassador at large who oversaw the breakup of the former Soviet Union during the Clinton administration and the author of “The Russia Hand.” Russia is far more exposed to market fluctuations than many countries, since it owns a majority stake in a number of the country’s largest companies. Gazprom, the energy concern that is Russia’s largest company by market capitalization, is majority-owned by the Russian Federation. At the same time, Gazprom’s shares are listed on the London stock exchange and are traded over the counter as American depositary receipts in the United States as well as on the Berlin and Paris exchanges. Over half of its shareholders are American, according to J. P. Morgan Securities. And the custodian bank for its depository receipts is the Bank of New York Mellon. Many Russian companies and banks are fully integrated into the global financial system. This week, Glencore Xstrata, the mining giant based in Switzerland, was in the middle of a roughly $1 billion debt-to-equity refinancing deal with the Russian oil company Russneft. Glencore said it expected to complete the deal despite the crisis. Glencore’s revenue last year was substantially larger than the entire gross domestic product of Ukraine, which was $176 billion, according to the World Bank. The old Soviet Union, in stark contrast, was all but impervious to foreign economic or business pressure, thanks in part to an ideological commitment to self-sufficiency. As recently as 1985, foreign trade amounted to just 4 percent of the country’s gross domestic product, and nearly all that was with the communist satellite countries of Eastern Europe. But the Soviet Union’s economic insularity and resulting economic stagnation was a major cause of the Soviet Union’s collapse. According to Mr. Talbott, the Soviet Union’s president at the time, Mikhail Gorbachev, was heavily influenced by Soviet economists and other academics who warned that by the turn of the century in 2000, the Soviet economy would be smaller than South Korea’s if it did not introduce major economic reforms and participate in the global economy. To attract investment capital, Mr. Gorbachev created the Moscow stock exchange in 1990 and issued an order permitting Soviet citizens to own and trade stocks, bonds and other securities for the first time since the 1917 Bolshevik revolution. (Before then, Russia had a flourishing stock exchange in St. Petersburg, established by order of Peter the Great. It was housed in an elegant neoclassical building directly across the waterfront from the Winter Palace. As a symbol of wealth and capitalism, it was one of the earliest casualties of the revolution.) Photo Even before this week’s gyrations, the Russian stock market index had dropped near 8 percent last year, and it and the Russian economy have been suffering from low commodity prices and investor concerns about the Federal Reserve’s tapering of bond purchases — factors of little significance during the Cold War. By contrast, today “Russia is too weak and vulnerable economically to go to war,” Mr. Aslund said. “The Kremlin’s fundamental mistake has been to ignore its economic weakness and dependence on Europe. Almost half of Russia’s exports go to Europe, and three-quarters of its total exports consist of oil and gas. The energy boom is over, and Europe can turn the tables on Russia after its prior gas supply cuts in 2006 and 2009. Europe can replace this gas with liquefied natural gas, gas from Norway and shale gas. If the European Union sanctioned Russia’s gas supply to Europe, Russia would lose $100 billion or one-fifth of its export revenues, and the Russian economy would be in rampant crisis.” Mr. Putin may be “living in another world,” as the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, put it this week, but surely even he recognizes that the world has changed drastically since 1956 or 1968. He has no doubt been getting an earful from his wealthy oligarch friends, many of whom run Russia’s largest companies and have stashed their personal assets in places like London and New York. The oligarchs “would not dare to challenge him,” a prominent Russian economist told me. (He asked not to be named for fear of retribution.) “But they would say something like they would have to lay off workers and reduce tax payments.” During the Cold War, there were few, if any, Russian billionaires. Today, there are 111, according to Forbes magazine’s latest rankings, and Russia ranks third in the number of billionaires, behind the United States and China. The economist noted that the billionaire Russian elite — who are pretty much synonymous with Mr. Putin’s friends and allies — are the ones who would be severely affected by visa bans, which were imposed by President Obama on Thursday. Other penalties might include asset freezes. Many Russian oligarchs have real estate and other assets in Europe and the United States, like the Central Park West penthouse a trust set up by the Russian tycoon Dmitry Rybolovlev bought for $88 million. “This is what may have already forced Putin to retreat,” the Russian economist said. And while the Cold War was a global contest between Marxism and capitalism, there is today “no real ideological component to the conflict except that Putin has become the personification of rejecting the West as a model,” Mr. Talbott said. “He wants to promote a Eurasian community dominated by Moscow, but that’s not an ideology. Russia’s economy may be an example of crony capitalism, but it is capitalism. There’s not even a shadow of Marxism-Leninism now.” What brought down the old Soviet Union and ended the Cold War “was the economic imperative to make Russia into a modern, efficient, normal state, a player in the international economy, not because of military power but because of a strong economy,” Mr. Talbott continued. But “to have a modern economy, you need the rule of law and a free press.” Mr. Putin, he said, “isn’t advancing Russia’s progress.” The Russian economist agreed. “The pre-2008 social compact was that Putin would rule Russia while Russians would see growing incomes,” he said. “Now, the growth has stalled, and he needs ideology, coupled with propaganda and repressions. Apparently, the Soviet restoration is the only ideology he can come up with.” Russia does have uniquely strong ties to Ukraine. “Of all the former provinces of the old Soviet Union, it’s the most painful to have lost and the one many Russians would most want to have back,” Mr. Talbott said. “The ties between Kiev and Moscow go back over 300 years. Ukraine is the heart of Russian culture.” With Russian troops entrenched in the Crimean peninsula and some Russian Ukrainians clamoring for annexation, there may be little the United States or its allies can do to restore the status quo. “Containment, in a muted and modified way, will once again be the strategy of the West and the mission of NATO,” Mr. Talbott predicted. But not another Cold War, which is surely a good thing. “A propaganda war is completely feasible,” the Russian economist said. “The recent events were completely irrational, angering the West for no reason. This is what is most scary, especially for businesses. Instead of reforming the stagnating economy, Putin scared everybody for no reason and with no gain in sight. So it is hard to predict his next actions. But I think a real Cold War is unlikely.”
But in turn, Obama gave no categorical commitment whether the 62-year-old Mutual Defense Treaty (MDT) between the two countries—the backbone of the Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement (Edca) signed by Defense Secretary Voltaire Gazmin and US Ambassador Philip Goldberg—would apply in case the Philippines’ territorial dispute with China escalates into an armed confrontation. Steering clear of the question, Obama instead pointed to Beijing’s “interest” in abiding by international law, saying “larger countries have a greater responsibility” to do so. “Our goal is not to counter China; our goal is not to contain China,” he said in a joint press conference with President Aquino in Malacañang, reflecting a delicate balancing act throughout his weeklong trip that earlier took him to Japan, South Korea and Malaysia. “Our goal is to make sure that international rules and norms are respected, and that includes in the area of maritime disputes.” “We don’t go around sending ships and threatening folks,” Obama said.
While assistance from the United States in defending the Philippine maritime territory would be optimal, this cannot be solely relied upon. The United States signed the Mutual Defense Treaty of 1951 with the Philippines, but is arguably neglecting its obligations to defend the Philippines in the South China Sea against Chinese incursions. While China militarizes and builds structures on islands and shoals within the Philippine exclusive economic zone, such as Panatag Shoal, the United States is conducting joint military exercises, and developing new trade agreements, with China. The United States limits its response to token military aid and cheap talk about Chinese violation of international law. Since the 2012 standoff, neither has the Philippines done anything significant militarily to stop China. While the Philippine military cannot come close to defeating China in a conventional naval battle, the Philippines could use special operations tactics against structures and Chinese naval assets on Panatag shoal to make China’s incursions prohibitively costly.
MANILA, Philippines–Amid his country’s assertive behavior in the South China Sea, China’s ambassador to the Philippines on Tuesday assured Filipinos that the territorial dispute would be “temporary” and was optimistic that it would eventually be resolved peacefully. Speaking during the 13th Filipino-Chinese Friendship Day celebration in Manila, Ambassador Zhao Jianhua said his country and its Asian neighbors share a “common aspiration to maintain regional peace and stability.” “Compared with our thousand-year-old friendship and extensive cooperation, the difficulties we are facing on [the] South China Sea issue are temporary,” he said in the presence of President Aquino and other top government officials. “It is our common responsibility to handle the South China Sea issue in a proper and peaceful manner.” In his speech, the President reiterated his government’s position that the dispute with China was not the “sum total” of its relationship with the Philippines. Using its nine-dash line doctrine, Beijing is claiming practically the entire South China Sea, including areas located well within the Philippines’ exclusive economic zone. Still, Zhao said his government “has always attached great importance to its relations with the Philippines, and I believe that we have the wisdom, patience and courage to settle the disputes through negotiations and consultations.”
WASHINGTON — Despite rising nationalist sentiment in the South China Sea region, Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said he thinks a growing regional interdependence will prevent any maritime conflicts from occurring. Speaking Tuesday at the Washington-based Council on Foreign Relations, Lee said the Asia-Pacific region is changing, especially with a rising China. He said other countries are becoming stronger and their interactions have become more intense in the past 10 years, as trade and people movements grow. But, with such interaction, he said, come more friction points, such as territorial disputes in the South China Sea. "None of the Southeast Asian countries want to have a fight with China. In fact, China, too, goes considerably out of its way to develop friendly relations with ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations),” Lee said. “But, there is this issue of the territorial and maritime disputes,” he added. “It is not easy to resolve because of another factor that has changed in the past 10 years, because nationalism has become a stronger sentiment and a stronger factor in influencing governments.” Lee said this is particularity true in Japan and China. South China Sea He said China maintains that its historic claims on most of the South China Sea precede international law and this has to be recognized. "I’m not a lawyer, so I presume there is some plausibility in that argument. But, from the point of view of a country which must survive in an international system, where there are big countries and small and outcomes cannot be determined just by might is right, I think international law must have a big weight in how disputes are resolved,” Lee said. Lee suggested China follow the example of another big power, the United States, in generally abiding by international law. He said if China can reach that position, it will have made a great achievement. Historically, Lee said, China knows that other big powers that have risen by the use of might, such as Spain, Portugal, Nazi Germany, the Soviet Union and the British Empire, have all fallen. He said China is trying to avoid making the same mistake. Lee said that while China is successfully transforming its economy, it still has not figured out what he calls social management maintaining social harmony while finding ways to engage the population and its demand for a greater say. But, Lee said he is confident Chinese leaders are committed to the path of reform.
History initially suggests that the South China Sea is not a flashpoint. The loss of life resulting from the use of force there pales in comparison to those in East Asia’s traditional flashpoints. For instance, in the unresolved Korean War (1950–53), which remains at the heart of continuing tensions on the Korean Peninsula, an estimated two million military personnel were either killed or unaccounted for.7 A comparable number of casualties occurred in the Chinese Civil War (1946–1949), which left today’s Taiwan flashpoint as a direct product.8 Further, at a time when some analysts are talking up the prospects of war between China and Japan over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands, it is worth recalling that an estimated 15–35 million perished during the course of the second Sino–Japanese War (1937–45).9¶ While history is not destiny, more recent estimates suggest that the combustion of any one of these flashpoints today could prove equally devastating. Richard Bush and Michael O’Hanlon of the Brookings Institution, for example, predict that a conflict over Taiwan could spark a nuclear war involving 1.5 billion people and produce a fundamental change in the international order.10 Similar estimates produced at the time of the 1993–94 North¶ Korean nuclear crisis suggested that war on the¶ Korean Peninsula could cost half a million lives¶ and up to US$1 trillion in its first ninety days.11¶ Conflict between Asia’s two most powerful navies¶ in the East China Sea could prove equally devastating, particularly given that China and Japan are also the world’s second- and third-largest economies, respectively. Total trade between these two historical great powers of East Asia currently stands at U.S. $345 billion.12¶ It is hard to envisage a credible scenario where a skirmish in the South China Sea could erupt into a conflict of similar proportions. The nationalist foundations of these disputes are fundamentally different from those underpinning East Asia’s traditional flashpoints. By way of example, recent polling suggests that 87 percent of the Chinese public view Japan negatively, whilst 50 percent anticipate a military dispute with Japan.13 Reflecting this sentiment, when Tokyo announced its decision to purchase contested Islands in the East China Sea from their private owner in September 2012, this sparked widespread anti-Japanese protests across China that spread to more than 100 cities.14 Such public displays of nationalist sentiment stand in marked contrast to June 2013 anti-China protests in Hanoi following Vietnamese allegations that a Chinese vessel had rammed and damaged a Vietnamese fishing boat. Subsequently, a mere 150 protesters gathered in the city center.15 Crowds of comparable size have attended anti-Chinese protests in the Philippines. For instance, a March 2012 protest outside the Chinese Embassy in Manila that organizers expected to draw 1,000 protesters attracted barely half that number.
The strategic geography of the South China Sea also militates against it being a genuine flashpoint. Throughout history, large bodies of water have tended to inhibit the willingness and ability of adversaries to wage war. In The Tragedy of Great Power Politics, for instance, John Mearsheimer refers to “the stopping power of water,” writing of the limits that large bodies of water place on the capacity of states to project military power—relative, at least, to when they share common land borders.17 Even when clashes at sea do occur, history suggests that these generally afford statesmen greater time and space to find diplomatic solutions. As Robert Ross observes, in such cases “neither side has to fear that the other’s provocative diplomacy or movement of troops is a prelude to attack and immediately escalate to heightened military readiness. Tension can be slower to develop, allowing the protagonists time to manage and avoid unnecessary escalation.”18¶ Ross’ observation, in turn, dovetails elegantly with the issue of proximity, which Hoyt regards as a defining feature of a flashpoint. The antagonists in the South China Sea disputes are less proximate than in the case of the Korean Peninsula—where the two Koreas share a land border that remains the most militarized on earth. The same can be said of the Taiwan flashpoint. Indeed, the proximity of Taiwan to the mainland affords Beijing credible strategic options— and arguably even incentives—involving the use of force that are not available to it in the South China Sea.19¶ Finally, and related to the third of Hoyt’s criteria, the South China Sea cannot be said to engage the vital interests of Asia’s great powers. To be sure, much has been made of India’s growing interests in this part of the world— particularly following reports of a July 2011 face-off between a Chinese ship and an Indian naval vessel that was leaving Vietnamese waters.20 However, New Delhi’s interests in the South China Sea remain overwhelmingly economic, not strategic, driven as they are by the search for oil. Moreover, even if New Delhi had anything more than secondary strategic interests at stake in the geographically distant South China Sea, it is widely accepted that India’s armed forces will for some time lack the capacity to credibly defend these.21 Similarly, while much has been made of Tokyo’s willingness to assist Manila with improving its maritime surveillance capabilities,22 for reasons of history and geography, Tokyo’s interests in the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands dispute, the Korean Peninsula, and even the Taiwan flashpoint dwarf those which it has at stake in the more distant South China Sea. The extent to which this body of water genuinely engages the vital interests of China and the United States continues to be overstated.
That said, it is equally important not to exaggerate the pace and scope of China’s military modernization, conflating trends in the Southeast Asian distribution of power with a potential Chinese challenge to U.S. primacy in the broader Western Pacific. China currently does not possess the capability to project substantial power into the South China Sea, and will likely remain unable to do so for at least another two decades, its ongoing experimentation with aircraft carriers notwithstanding. As Dan Blumenthal has observed, “the PLA lacks a sustained power projection capability associated with asserting full control over the area, including sufficient at-sea replenishment and aerial refueling capabilities, modern destroyers with advanced air defense capabilities, and nuclear submarines, as well as regional bases to support logistical requirements.”42 Added to this, questions have risen regarding the as yet largely unproven ability of PLA Navy crews to undertake prolonged operations at sea, particularly under conditions of high-intensity conflict.43
My only reservation about Sun’s superb book is that China and Japan may not be consciously engaging in soft-power competition with each other in South Korea and Southeast Asia, although this does appear to be the case in Taiwan. Tokyo adopted a softer approach toward Southeast Asia after the violent anti-Japanese demonstrations in Bangkok and Jakarta during Prime Minister Tanaka Kakuei’s visits in 1974. Japan’s strategic shift to a good-neighbor policy had little to do with competition with China. In recent years, Beijing and Tokyo have wooed Southeast Asia with free trade agreements and economic partnerships while jostling to protect their respective interests in the South China Sea. This competition is framed by economics and geopolitics but not necessarily soft power. In this regard, the two countries today may indeed be rivals in Southeast Asia but are not necessarily charming ones.
But doubts remain over whether Beijing truly regards the South China Sea as a “core interest.” Michael Swaine reports that his investigation of Chinese official sources “failed to unearth a single example of a PRC official or an official PRC document or media source that publicly and explicitly identifies the South China Sea as a PRC ‘core interest.’”25 By contrast, Chinese officials have not exhibited such reticence when referring publicly to Taiwan or Tibet in such terms. Nor has Beijing shown any reluctance to threaten or to actually use military force in relation to these. During the 1995–96 Taiwan Strait Crisis, Beijing twice fired ballistic missiles into waters off Taiwan in an effort to intimidate voters in advance of the island’s first democratic presidential election.26 China went further in March 2005 when the National People’s Congress passed an “anti-secession law” requiring the use of “non-peaceful means” against Taiwan in the event its leaders sought to establish formal independence from the mainland.27¶ Explicit threats and promises of this nature are absent in official Chinese statements on the South China Sea even when, as in May 2012, the normally smooth-talking Vice Foreign Minister Fu Ying ambiguously warned the Philippines “not to misjudge the situation” and not to “escalate tensions without considering consequences” at the height of the Scarborough Shoal standoff.28 Indeed, although Beijing appears eager to demonstrate its growing naval capabilities by conducting military exercises in the South China Sea—as in March 2013 when it controversially conducted exercises within 50 miles of the Malaysian coastline—it is striking that Chinese efforts to actually exercise jurisdiction in this region continue to be confined, by and large, to the use of civil maritime law enforcement vessels.29¶ This stands in contrast to the East China Sea, where exchanges between Beijing and Tokyo have quickly escalated to involve the use of military ships and aircraft. In early 2013, for instance, Tokyo accused Chinese warships of locking weapons-guiding radar onto a Japanese helicopter and a destroyer in two separate incidents.30 In November 2013, Beijing went on to announce a controversial new “Air Defense Identification Zone” (ADIZ) over the East China Sea and initially threatened to take defensive action against aircraft that did not disclose their flight plans prior to entering the zone and identifying themselves when operating within it.31¶ Unlike its recent behavior in the East China Sea, Beijing’s approach toward the South China Sea disputes has traditionally been one of conflict de- escalation. Beijing’s clear preference has been to manage such tensions bilaterally. Following a period where an increase in Chinese maritime patrols led to a rise in the number of clashes with Vietnamese (and Philippine) vessels, for instance, Beijing and Hanoi reached agreement in October 2011 on principles for settling maritime disputes. Likewise in June 2013, China and Vietnam agreed to establish new hotlines to assist with managing incidents at sea and dealing with fishing disputes.32¶ Beijing has also shown some willingness to take the multilateral route. Most famously, China signed a non-binding “Declaration on Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea” with ASEAN in November 2002. While protracted progress continues, the official position of both China and ASEAN remains to establish a legally binding code of conduct in the South China Sea intended to incorporate mechanisms for avoiding incidents at sea, crisis management, confidence building measures, and joint development.33 Beijing has certainly not shown similar flexibility in relation to any of its other publicly-declared “core interests.” At China’s insistence, for example, discussion of Taiwan is strictly off limits in Asia’s multilateral forums.
Finally, the capacity of Beijing and Washington to navigate crises in their bilateral relationship further suggests that the South China Sea is not a flashpoint. Over the past two or more decades, the United States and China have gone to great lengths to manage bilateral tensions and prevent them from spiraling out of control. A recent example occurred in May 2012, when the two arrived at a mutually acceptable solution after the blind Chinese activist Chen Guangcheng sought refuge at the U.S. embassy in Beijing.48¶ In the South China Sea, two major, modern Sino–U.S. crises have been successfully managed. The first occurred in April 2001, when a U.S. EP-3 conducting routine surveillance in airspace above the South China Sea collided with a Chinese J-8 jet fighter and was forced to make an emergency landing on Hainan Island. To¶ be sure, efforts to address this crisis did not¶ initially proceed particularly smoothly, as¶ Chinese officials refused to answer incoming¶ calls from the U.S. Embassy. Ultimately,¶ however, those most intimately involved in the¶ crisis—such as then-Commander of the U.S.¶ Pacific Command, Admiral Dennis Blair—have¶ written subsequently how top U.S. officials “made¶ every effort to exercise prudence and restraint¶ while they collected more information about the nature of the incident.” They have also acknowledged that their Chinese counterparts “made a series of grudging concessions that ultimately resulted in success...after they decided that it was important to overall Sino–U.S. relations to solve the incident.”49¶ Again in March 2009, while diplomatic tensions between Beijing and Washington heightened in the immediate aftermath of an incident involving the harassment of the USNS Impeccable by five Chinese vessels, good sense also prevailed as senior U.S. and Chinese officials issued statements maintaining that such incidents would not become the norm and pledging deeper cooperation to ensure so.50 Added to these examples of effective crisis management, it is also worth noting that Washington reportedly facilitated a compromise to the April 2012 Scarborough Shoal standoff.51
On January 18, while meeting with the press in Washington, D.C.， together with the Japanese Foreign Minister, U.S. Secretary of State Hilary Clinton stated, “although the United States does not take a position on the ultimate sovereignty of the islands, we acknowledge they are under the administration of Japan and we oppose any unilateral actions that would seek to undermine Japanese administration.” This was a development partial to Japan and was a step back from its previous position. Clearly, it was Japan that unilaterally took actions to “nationalize” the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands and thus altered the status quo. Stating the above via its Secretary of State, Washington actually adopted a practice of being partial to Tokyo on this issue. The objective of the Japanese Foreign Minister’s visit was thus probably realized, but this was unfair to China. The United States has a historical responsibility for the dispute over Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands. In 1972, when the administrative power over Okinawa was reverted to Japan, Diaoyu was inappropriately included. In essence, this was a territorial dispute between Japan and China. Any arrangement made between Japan and the U.S. was invalid. Nevertheless, the U.S. Department of State unambiguously declared at the time that no U.S. act involved any part of the issue of sovereignty over Diaoyu/Senkaku. According to the 1971 words by Secretary of State William Rogers, the Okinawa Reversion Treaty “does not affect the legal status of those islands [Diaoyu/Senkaku] at all.” In his letter of October 20, 1971, Acting Assistant Legal Adviser Robert Starr stated, “The United States has made no claim to the Senkaku Islands and considers that any conflicting claims to the islands are a matter for resolution by the parties concerned.” This demonstrated U.S. government was aware that the sovereignty issue on Diaoyu/Senkaku was unresolved. The problem is, over the past forty years, Japan grasped the de facto control over Diaoyu/Senkaku and took steps to strengthen this kind of control. More seriously, starting from a few years ago, the position of the Japanese government shifted to stating that “there is no territorial dispute between Japan and China.” Namely, Diaoyu/Senkaku belongs to Japan and there is no controversy. Not surprisingly, China was firmly opposed this stance and yet it showed considerable restraint. As a result, the situation remained under control and peace was lasting. In September 2010, the inexperienced Democratic Party of Japan mishandled the fishing boat incident at Diaoyu, which quickly escalated to an alarming degree. Consequently, this poorly managed incident greatly disrupted the hard-won benign state of the Sino-Japanese relationship. Unfortunately, Japan did not seem to learn a lesson from this incident. Last year, when the “purchasing” and “nationalizing” Diaoyu/Senkaku movement was gaining momentum, China repeatedly reminded and suggested that the Japanese government be careful regarding the so-called “nationalization”. President Hu Jintao met with Prime Minister Noda of Japan face to face during the APEC Meeting in Vladivostok and cautioned against the Japanese government making a wrong decision. Disappointingly, Japan ignored all the warnings and, just two days later, went ahead with the so-called “nationalization.” This was like opening the Pandora’s box, which ignited anger and strong reactions from China. Now, everybody realizes that the warning Mr. Niwa, recent Japanese Ambassador to China, made last year to The Financial Times was absolutely correct. The reality is that “purchasing” or “nationalizing” the islands will strike a severe blow to Sino-Japanese relations, one of the most important bilateral relationships. More recently, the Diaoyu/Senkaku standoff escalated to a new level as the Japanese and Chinese fighter jets were mobilized. This development made observers feel that the possibility of a military conflict was imminent. No doubt, a military conflict is in nobody’s interest and something no one wants to see. The high priority for the two countries is to manage the crisis, avoid escalation, and prevent a military conflict. Against this backdrop, Prime Minister of Japan Abe Shinzo dispatched Yamaguchi Natsuo, the party leader of Japan’s pacifist New Komeito, to China,with a letter. Yamaguchi was carefully chosen for this mission. For many years, New Komeito has kept a good relationship with Beijing, and the political party is a part of Japan’s current ruling coalition. While meeting with Yamaguchi Natsuo on January 25, Chinese leader Xi Jinping called on a timely, proper resolution to sensitive bilateral issues. Yamaguchi presented the Japanese Prime Minister’s handwritten letter to Xi during the meeting. At this “special” time, the visit was useful indeed. Effective communication between the two sides is absolutely essential. At the end of the day, Japan has to give up the position that “there is no territorial dispute between Japan and China” and to admit that Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands are disputed. Only on that basis can the two sides try to find a way out. At this stage, the item high on the agenda is not who possesses sovereignty but rather what efforts they should make to soften the tension and prevent from any military conflict. Washington has a responsibility to urge Tokyo to do so. Erecting a protectionist umbrella is not favorable to getting beyond this crisis. A more neutral stance is a better option.
For its part, China has played down the dispute with Japan in recent months, and has promised that it won’t interfere with anyone’s navigation rights in the South China Sea. And it would seem foolish even to try. For all its double-digit defense spending, China is still many years away from being able to challenge U.S. military power, and no doubt knows that. Nor would it seem to have much to gain; China’s economy is thoroughly dependent on sea-going trade and cutting off any shipping would mean cutting off its own, as well.
United States involvement or attempts by the US to get involved in the South China Sea (SCS) disputes is seen by some as a major factor in intensifying tensions in one of the world’s most critical regional flashpoints. China, as well as some ASEAN countries, does not welcome US participation in resolving the impasse over conflicting maritime and territorial claims in the strategic semi-enclosed sea. As such, countries like the Philippines, as well as Vietnam, have been perceived by some as aggravating the already tense situation by openly inviting US intervention and internationalizing what some see as a purely regional matter. This argument had long been played and, while it may make sense, certain historical circumstances raise questions over its indisputability.
JAKARTA: Indonesia’s financial authorities are looking at ways to limit a surge in foreign debt among private firms and want to enlist the help of banks, worried that runaway lending could spark instability in Southeast Asia’s largest economy. The central bank has expressed concern over a rise in the debt service ratio (DSR), which climbed to 46.3 per cent in the first quarter from 36.8 per cent in the same period last year due to a surge in private external debt. Bank Indonesia prefers the DSR, which is the ratio for repayments on external debt principal plus interest compared to a country’s total export earnings, to be below 35 per cent. “If the economy slows down and exports don’t pick up, the private sector has to be prudent offshore,” Mirza Adityaswara, senior deputy governor of Bank Indonesia, said yesterday. “The point is there should be regulation to make sure offshore borrowing is done prudently.” The amount of private external debt almost doubled to US$145.6 billion (RM465 billion) last April from around US$83.8 billion in 2010.
The threat of Islamic militants deploying terror tactics across Southeast Asia is making an unwelcome comeback. Driven in part by the relentless drive into Iraq by Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the threat has already emerged in Malaysia, Cambodia, Thailand and the Philippines. Authorities in these countries fear home-grown Islamic militants in league with Baghdadi and his Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) will return and plot their own caliphate, not unlike Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) did when it launched its own terror campaign in league with al-Qaeda more than a decade ago. Arrests have been made in Malaysia amid reports that four new terrorist groups have emerged to stake a claim over much of mainland Southeast Asia. All are Sunni Muslims with Shi’ites in their sights. Police are also looking for another five Malaysian men who fled to the Philippines where they are believed to be in hiding with the Abu Sattaf. The arrests followed the release of a video from ISIS senior clerics, titled There Is No Life Without Jihad. In the video, Abu Muthanna al Yemeni from Britain boasts about the many countries that have supplied ISIS mercenaries, adding: “We have brothers from Bangladesh, from Iraq, from Cambodia, Australia, UK.” Muslim leaders in Cambodia rejected the claims although diplomats says hundreds of foreign nationals, including Khmers, are fighting with ISIS. Among them are those who studied in madrassas in the Middle East. In recent days ISIS has changed its name to simply the Islamic State, after more than 15,000 militiamen loyal to Baghdadi extended the civil war in Syria southwards into Iraq, reaching as far as the northern outskirts of Baghdad. It insists a caliphate has been established across both countries and has released a map outlining its territorial ambitions, stretching from the Atlantic coast of Spain and Morocco to the western border of Myanmar. In Malaysia, and elsewhere in Southeast Asia, recruitment for ISIS and its vitriolic anti-Shia campaign is occurring through social media outlets, including Facebook. One analyst pointed to Lotfi Ariffin, who has 24,796 followers and was a member of Malaysia’s hardline Islamic party PAS. “It is worrisome, yes,” said Shahriman Lockman, a senior foreign policy analyst at Malaysia’s Institute of Strategic & International Studies. “If they wanted a safe haven for their training and operations, they could easily go to the numerous failed states in Africa. But they chose to operate from Malaysia, where the risk of being under surveillance is much higher.” Among them was 26-year-old Ahmad Tarmimi Maliki, said to be Malaysia’s first suicide bomber after he reportedly drove a military vehicle ladened with explosives into an Iraqi military post, killing 25 soldiers, six weeks ago. Details of the attack were published on the ISIS website under the headline “Mujahidin Malaysia Syahid Dalam Operasi Martyrdom.” Malaysian police have also arrested 19 people over the last two months in a counterterrorism operation the authorities hope will end any plans by jihadists of establishing recruitment and training centers in the Southeast Asian country. Meanwhile, the Royal Malaysian Navy is conducting background checks on staff after an officer was arrested for harboring militants plotting attacks in Iraq and Syria. Analysts said ISIS leader, Baghdadi, is attracting support and filling a void left by the killing of Osama bin Laden, with promises of an Islamic state and his ruthless approach to jihad. “ISIS’s priority has to be to sustain and consolidate its present campaign in Syria and Iraq rather than dissipate resources and personnel in non-core areas for the movement such as Southeast Asia,” said Gavin Greenwood, a regional security analyst with Hong Kong-based Allan & Associates. “However, ISIS’s success to date has and no doubt will continue to attract recruits to the movement with any survivors to what may be years of fighting from countries such as Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand representing a threat based on their skills and experience.”
The popular unrest that has brought Thai politics to a standstill is not particularly remarkable; political instability in the country has occurred cyclically over the past decade, and it shows no sign of abating anytime soon. What is remarkable about the current bout of turmoil is that it could prevent Thailand from benefiting from emerging economic developments in Southeast Asia. Over the past century, Thailand’s geopolitical advantages, namely its strategic location and ethnic and cultural influence, have conferred on the country a regional leadership role. But Southeast Asia is changing: Manufacturers are leaving China as it moves up the value chain, the region is slowly integrating economically, the United States is turning its attention away from the Middle East toward the Asia-Pacific region, and Beijing is trying to expand its influence in Southeast Asia. If instability persists, Thailand may not be able to lead or even benefit from these new regional realities. Since the 2006 military coup, Thai politics has become predictable. Political forces use public protests to forward their agenda, governments fall amid protests or military intervention, and a new election is held. Thailand’s political cycle is partly a result of the country’s inherent insolubility, whereby elites in Bangkok traditionally have ruled the more populous but politically marginalized rural regions. But now, the rural masses are finding the power to select representatives who do not conform to the traditional political-economic model.
Finally, even if one grants that saving two persons with dignity cannot outweigh and compensate for killing one—because dignity cannot be added and summed this way—this point still does not justify deontological constraints. On the extreme interpretation, why would not killing one person be a stronger obligation than saving two persons? If I am concerned with the priceless dignity of each, it would seem that I may still save two; it is just that my reason cannot be that the two compensate for the loss of one. Consider Hill’s example of a priceless object: If I can save two of three priceless statutes only by destroying one, then I cannot claim that saving two is not outweighed by the one that was not destroyed. Indeed, even if dignity cannot be simply summed up, how is the extreme interpretation inconsistent with the idea that I should save as many priceless objects as possible? Even if two do not simply outweigh and thus compensate for the loss of one, each is priceless; thus, I have good reason to save as many as I can. In short, it is not clear how the extreme interpretation justifies the ordinary killing/letting-die distinction or even how it conflicts with the conclusion that the more persons with dignity who are saved, the better.
With regard to John J. Mearsheimer’s essay “Say Goodbye to Taiwan” [March-April 2014], Mr. Mearsheimer presents hypothetical scenarios involving the implications for Taiwan in a future U.S.-Mainland China great power relationship. In his pessimistic assessment, among other things, he ultimately misses the mark by suggesting that time is not on Taiwan’s side. The truth, we believe, is the opposite. Mr. Mearsheimer seems to dismiss outright Taiwan’s ability to influence Mainland China in any real way, writing “Unfortunately for Taiwan, it has no way of influencing events so that [an economic slowdown or domestic political problems] actually becomes reality.” What he glosses over is the reality of Taiwan’s success as a market-oriented democracy: That Taiwan can, with time, influence Mainland China in a positive way. Particularly since President Ma Ying-jeou took office in 2008, Taiwan and Mainland China have signed 19 cross-Strait agreements, including an Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement; the number of Mainland students studying in Taiwan rose from 823 to over 24,000; and 37 percent of the eight million tourists to visit Taiwan in 2013 were mainland Chinese. As time passes, Taiwan’s success will definitely enlighten and make a positive impact on the general public of the Mainland. This is why, in his 2012 inauguration address, President Ma Ying-jeou talked about Taiwan’s successes in recent years, including cross-Strait rapprochement that has won broad public support and dramatically reduced tension between Taiwan and Mainland China. President Ma’s most salient point, though, was that “Taiwan’s experience in establishing democracy proves that it is not impossible for democratic institutions from abroad to take root in an ethnically Chinese society.” This increased interaction is also occurring on an administrative and to some extent political level: Earlier this month, Wang Yu-Chi, minister of Taiwan’s Mainland Affairs Council, and Zhang Zhijun, minister of Mainland China’s Taiwan Affairs Office, met and exchanged opinions on cross-Strait relations, marking the first ministerial meeting between the two governments since 1949. The essay concludes that even the best case scenario for Taiwan is a Beijing solution. However, the people on Taiwan simply will not accept a Beijing-led resolution, even a so-called “Hong Kong strategy.” Ultimately, the future of Taiwan will be decided by its 23 million people. The two sides of the Taiwan Strait, as President Ma said in his 2011 New Year’s message, “should not quarrel over political power, independence versus reunification, or Taiwan’s breathing room on the international stage. We should instead focus on encouraging and helping each other grow in terms of the core values of freedom, democracy, human rights, and rule of law.”
Although relatively muted in recent years, Taiwan is seen as the greatest potential flashpoint in U.S.-China relations. Indeed, U.S. defense analysts perceive China’s expanding Anti-Access/Area Denial (A2/AD) capabilities primarily through the lens of preventing the U.S. from intervening should Beijing invade Taiwan. Consequently, the main concepts the U.S. military has developed for countering A2/AD — namely, Air-Sea Battle and a blockade approach — appear to be based on the assumption that a shooting war with China would break out over Taiwan. In many ways, the concern over Taiwan is well-placed. China covets the island far more than any other piece of real estate, including the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands. For CCP leaders and many ordinary Chinese, Taiwan is one of the vast remaining vestiges of the country’s century of humiliation. Acquiring Taiwan would also significantly enhance the PLA’s ability to project power outwardly. Despite improvements in cross-Strait relations in recent years, China has refused to rule out the possibility of invasion. Besides having the motivation to acquire Taiwan, China seemingly is rapidly acquiring the capability to take the island by force. In recent years, the cross-Strait military balance has rapidly shifted in Beijing’s favor, and this trend is almost certain to continue so long as China’s economy continues to grow. Today, China has at least 1,600 ballistic missiles pointed at Taiwan, and Taiwan’s own Ministry of Defense admits that China will have sufficient military capabilities to mount a full cross-Strait attack by 2020. This has led some U.S. analysts, particularly academics of the Realist persuasion, to argue that the U.S. should gradually cede Taiwan to the People’s Republic of China. For example, Charles Glaser argued in a controversial Foreign Affairs article in 2011 that, given the risks of nuclear war between China and the United States, “the United States should consider backing away from its commitment to Taiwan. This would remove the most obvious and contentious flash point between the United States and China and smooth the way for better relations between them in the decades to come.” Similarly, in a recent talk in Taiwan, John Mearsheimer argued that short of acquiring an independent nuclear deterrent, Taiwan’s best option is to pursue the “Hong Kong strategy” toward Beijing. Under the Hong Kong strategy, “Taiwan accepts the fact it is doomed to lose its independence and become part of China. It then works hard to make sure that the transition is peaceful and that it gains as much autonomy as possible from Beijing.” Although the trend lines are undoubtedly working in China’s favor, it is ultimately extremely unlikely that China will try to seize Taiwan by force. Furthermore, should it try to do this, it is unlikely to succeed. Even assuming China’s military capabilities are great enough to prevent the U.S. from intervening, there are two forces that would likely be sufficient to deter China from invading Taiwan. The first and least important is the dramatic impact this would have on how countries in the region and around the world would view such a move. Globally, China seizing Taiwan would result in it being permanently viewed as a malicious nation. Regionally, China’s invasion of Taiwan would diminish any lingering debate over how Beijing will use its growing power. Every regional power would see its own fate in Taiwan. Although Beijing would try to reassure countries by claiming that Taiwan was part of China already, and thus the operation was a domestic stability one, this narrative would be convincing to none of China’s neighbors. Consequently, Beijing would face an environment in which each state was dedicated to cooperating with others to balance against Chinese power. But the more important deterrent for China would be the uncertainty of success. To be sure, China’s military capabilities are growing to the point where it will soon be assured of its ability to quickly defeat Taiwan’s military forces. A little longer down the road it will also likely be confident that it can prevent the U.S. from intervening in the conflict. However, as recent U.S. military conflicts have adequately demonstrated, being able to defeat another nation’s armed forces and being able to pacify the country are two different things altogether. It is in this latter aim that China’s strategy is likely to falter. Taiwanese are adamantly opposed to being incorporated into a non-Democratic China. These feelings would only harden in the aftermath of the invasion. Thus, even if it quickly defeated Taiwan’s formal military forces, the PLA would continue to have to contend with the remnants of resistance for years to come. Such a scenario would be deeply unsettling for leaders in Beijing as this defiance would likely inspire similar resistance among various groups on the mainland, starting first and foremost with ethnic minorities in the western China. Should the PLA resort to harsh oppression to squash resistance in Taiwan, this would deeply unsettle even Han Chinese on the mainland. In fact, the clear parallels with how Imperial Japan sought to pacify Taiwan and China would be lost on no one in China and elsewhere. The entire situation would be a nightmare for Chinese leaders. Consequently, they are nearly certain to avoid provoking it by invading Taiwan. The only real scenario in which they would invade Taiwan is if the island nation formally declared independence. But if Taiwanese leaders have avoided doing so to date, they are unlikely to think the idea is very wise as China goes stronger. Thus, the status-quo in the Taiwanese strait is unlikely to be changed by military force. Instead, Beijing is likely to continue drawing Taiwan closer economically, and seeking to disrupt the U.S.-Taiwanese bilateral relationship. The hope would be that leaders in Taipei will ultimately conclude that they cannot resist being absorbed into China, something China itself can facilitate this by offering favorable terms.
From the clash of conventional mainland Chinese and emerging Taiwanese nationalism, Day moves on in Chapter 4 to placing the conflict in the wider context of the Sino-US clash of interest – a favourite topic for writers of international relations and strategic studies on which innumerable papers have long been churned out year after year in recent decades. Of particular interest here is that, as Day argues, amidst all the rhetoric of mainland political leaders and scholars emphasizing China’s “peaceful rise” or “peaceful development”, the alarming, disproportionate growth in Chinese military expenditure, her self-justified aggressive assertion of sovereignty over almost all of South China Sea, her untiring reiteration of past national humiliation, her exploitation of the society's age-old hatred for Japan and her arrogant refusal to abrogate the possibility of the use of force towards Taiwan to the extent of writing the non-peaceful solution into her Anti-Secession Law definitely do not help to placate her neighbours and the US and dispel their worries of a “China threat”. The centrality of Taiwan in the Sino-US rivalry for Asia-Pacific hegemony, given the undisputed geopolitical strategic importance of the island state for America, has made increasing Taiwanese economic dependence on China a real worry for America, according to Day, citing a Rand Corporation project for the US Defense Department, “Chinese Economic Coercion against Taiwan: A Tricky Weapon to Use” 11 . The research pointed to the possibility that as the Taiwanese economy is getting increasingly dependent on China, there could be pressure on Taiwan at some point in time to make a reckless move to declare independence to avoid Chinese economic oppression getting out of control as time might not be on Taiwan’s side. Alternatively, being unable to effectively achieve her political objectives via economic means for too long, China might yet resort to military means to force unification with Taiwan, amidst a feeling of defeat from the failure of playing her economic trump card and the concomitant increasing anxiety over Taiwan’s eventually declaring independence – witness the sudden “Sunflower Movement” that is sweeping Taipei through March-April 201 4 right at this very moment of writing, led by hundreds of thousands of student protesters enraged by President Ma Ying-jeou’s “Politburo-esque maneuver” 1 2 to enact a trade pact with China to open up the island state’s service industries without fulfilling the promise to allow a clause-by-clause review before implementation. The ultimate source of the protest movement is the increasing wariness felt by Taiwan’s younger generation of, besides and more than the economic impacts of effective merging the two economies though the trade pact, the foreboding sense of China’s incremental political control over Taiwan and the Hongkongization ofTaiwan’s hard-won democracy.
Taipei, July 12 (CNA) The Ministry of Foreign Affairs on Saturday reaffirmed Taiwan's sovereignty over four island groups in the South China Sea, while urging neighboring countries and territories involved in territorial disputes in the area to resolve their differences through dialogue and negotiation. From the perspective of history, geography and international law, the Spratly Islands, as well as the Paracel, Macclesfield and Pratas island groups and their surrounding waters are all undoubtedly an inherent part of the Republic of China (Taiwan) territory, said MOFA spokeswoman Anna Kao. The ROC government is willing to uphold the basic principles of "safeguarding sovereignty, shelving disputes, promoting peace, reciprocity and joint exploration" and work with other countries to maintain regional peace and stability, Kao said. The government is also urging neighboring countries to exercise self-restraint so that the South China Sea disputes can be resolved peacefully through dialogue and consultation, Kao said. She was commenting on a proposal Friday by Michael Fuchs, U.S. deputy assistant secretary of state for Strategy and Multilateral Affairs, for claimant states to clarify and agree to voluntarily freeze certain actions and activities that escalate disputes and cause instability in the region. Fuchs said the U.S. wants the 10-nation Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and China to have "a real and substantive discussion" to flesh out a call for self-restraint contained in a Declaration of Conduct they agreed to in 2002, with a view toward signing a formal maritime Code of Conduct. He said it would be up to the claimants to decide what elements should be included in a freeze, but these could include recommitting not to establish new outposts or seize territory another claimant had occupied before the 2002 declaration. Claimants could also define what types of actions would be considered provocative and what were merely efforts to maintain a long-existing presence dating back to before 2002, Fuchs suggested. "For example, alterations that fundamentally change the nature, size or capabilities of the presence could fall under the freeze, whereas routine maintenance operations would be permissible," he told a Washington think tank. The U.S. is expected to push the proposal at a gathering of Asian foreign ministers in Myanmar next month. Kao said that Taiwan and the U.S. have maintained an effective communication channel and have a good understanding of each other's stance on a peaceful resolution to the South China Sea territorial disputes. Taiwan is working to further exchange views with the U.S. on its proposal and the situation in the South China Sea, she added. Also Saturday, ruling Kuomintang Legislator Lin Yu-fang said that Fuchs' proposal does not take aim at Taiwan because Taiwan has not taken any of the actions against which the U.S. advised. "We are not one of the troublemakers; the U.S. fully understands this," Lin added. (Hsien Chia-chen, Wen Kuei-hsiang and Evelyn Kao)
Trade frictions between China and the United States will probably become more heated in the months ahead, but no trade war will break out between the two biggest economies in the  world, Pascal Lamy, director-general of the World Trade Organization said on Tuesday. "As Chinese trade with the rest of the world grows, there is a normal statistical proportion of trade frictions, and we believe that the frictions can be handled peacefully," said Lamy. "But nothing like a trade war." Lamy made the remarks in an interview conducted at the Beijing 2012 Round Table on WTO Accession Best Practices for the least developed countries, which was held in the capital city. During the forum, Chen Deming, minister of commerce, said China is willing to help the least developed countries in the world join the WTO. Having them in the organization will be good for the world economy and global trade, as well as for China. China, together with other countries in the WTO, is calling for a simplification of the procedures countries must go through to join the trade organization. Agreements meant to bring about that goal are expected to be signed by July, Chen said. Last week, the Ministry of Commerce wrote on its website about policies used to support wind, solar and other sorts of renewable energy projects in five US states, including Washington, New Jersey, Massachusetts, Ohio and California, saying they violate WTO policies and trade treaties. China also complained to the WTO about the US’ imposition of anti-subsidy duties on $7.29 billion worth of Chinese goods from 22 different categories that were imported to the US last year. The announcements came on the heels of the US Commerce Department's preliminary decision to place anti-dumping tariffs of up to 250 percent on imports of Chinese solar cells. Analysts at home and abroad expressed worries that China's response to that action will provoke a trade war between the two nations. Lamy, though, said a member of the WTO has the right to challenge other members if it thinks they have violated trade rules. "Sometimes, China challenges the US, EU, with anti-dumping or countervailing duties, and sometimes it is other way round," he said. "There are trade frictions, trade disputes, but there are no trade wars." As the US presidential election draws near, the US may take further actions against China and its trade policies in the hope of quieting critics who complain about their country’s trade deficit with China and high unemployment rate, experts said. Obama has announced plans to establish a trans-agency trade enforcement unit that will be charged with investigating the policies and practices of the country’s most important trade partners. In November, China began investigating whether the US was improperly using subsidies to lower the price of US products. That scrutiny came a month after the seven US solar manufacturers filed a complaint with the US International Trade Commission and the Department of Commerce. The Ministry of Commerce said the US has used subsidies in ways that are "inconsistent with the WTO rules and rulings in many regards". "Trade frictions are a normal statistical proportion volume of trade," Lamy said. "As trade grows, the number of trade frictions grows." The Commerce Department is scheduled to make a final determination on solar tariffs in early October. The US agency also announced it would investigate Chinese exports of wind turbines, saying makers of that equipment have received unfair government subsidies. It plans to make an announcement on Wednesday about the duties it will impose on those products. Along with the EU and Japan, the US filed a complaint in March with the WTO to challenge China’s policies governing exports of rare-earth minerals. "We are concerned that during the financial crisis, protectionism is growing," Lamy said. "That's the reality." "But on the whole, there are not dramatic surges of protectionist measures, although there are signs that remain worrying. It's like going to a doctor from time to time. We do checkups, and we tell the patients, 'Be careful'."
A Growing Constituency for Freer Trade The WTO/GATT system was created in the first place to deter a protectionist pandemic triggered by global economic contraction. It was created to deal with the very situation that is at hand. But in today's integrated global economy, those rules are not the only incentives to keep trade barriers in check. With the advent and proliferation of transnational supply chains, cross-border direct investment, multinational joint ventures, and equity tie-ups, the "Us versus Them" characterization of world commerce no longer applies. Most WTO members are happy to lower tariffs because imports provide consumers with lower prices and greater variety, which incentivizes local business to improve quality and productivity, which is crucial to increasing living standards. Moreover, many local economies now rely upon access to imported raw materials, components, and capital equipment for their own value-added activities. To improve chances to attract investment and talent in a world where capital (physical, financial, and human) is increasingly mobile, countries must maintain policies that create a stable business climate with limited administrative, logistical, and physical obstacles. The experience of India is instructive. Prior to reforms beginning in the 1990s, India's economy was virtually closed. The average tariff rate on intermediate goods in 1985 was nearly 150 percent. By 1997 the rate had been reduced to 30 percent. As trade barriers were reduced, imports of intermediate goods more than doubled. The tariff reductions caused prices to fall and Indian industry suddenly had access to components and materials it could not import previously. That access enabled Indian manufacturers to cut costs and use the savings to invest in new product lines, which was a process that played a crucial role in the overall growth of the Indian economy.16 India's approach has been common in the developing world, where most comprehensive trade reforms during the past quarter century have been undertaken unilaterally, without any external pressure, because governments recognized that structural reforms were in their country's interest. According to the World Bank, between 1983 and 2003, developing countries reduced their weighted average tariffs by almost 21 percentage points (from 29.9 percent to 9.3 percent) and unilateral reforms accounted for 66 percent of those cuts.17 The Indispensible Nation The United States accounts for the highest percentage of world trade and has the world's largest economy. The WTO/GATT system is a U.S.-inspired and U.S.-shaped institution. Recession in the United States has triggered a cascade of economic contractions around the world, particularly in export-dependent economies. Needless to say, U.S. trade policy is closely and nervously observed in other countries. But despite the occasional anti-trade rhetoric of the Democratic Congress and the protectionist-sounding campaign pledges of President Obama, the United States is unlikely to alter its strong commitment to the global trading system. There is simply too much at stake. Like businesses in other countries, U.S. businesses have become increasingly reliant on transnational supply chains. Over 55 percent of U.S. import value in 2007 was of intermediate goods, which indicates that U.S. producers depend highly on imported materials, components, and capital equipment. And there is also the fact that 95 percent of the world's population lives outside of the United States, so an open trade policy is an example to uphold.
"Almost all of those red hotspots correspond to major aquifers of the world. What Grace shows us is that groundwater depletion is happening at a very rapid rate in almost all of the major aquifers in the arid and semi-arid parts of the world." The Middle East, north Africa and south Asia are all projected to experience water shortages over the coming years because of decades of bad management and overuse. Watering crops, slaking thirst in expanding cities, cooling power plants, fracking oil and gas wells – all take water from the same diminishing supply. Add to that climate change – which is projected to intensify dry spells in the coming years – and the world is going to be forced to think a lot more about water than it ever did before. The losses of water reserves are staggering. In seven years, beginning in 2003, parts of Turkey, Syria, Iraq and Iran along the Tigris and Euphrates rivers lost 144 cubic kilometres of stored freshwater – or about the same amount of water in the Dead Sea, according to data compiled by the Grace mission and released last year. A small portion of the water loss was due to soil drying up because of a 2007 drought and to a poor snowpack. Another share was lost to evaporation from lakes and reservoirs. But the majority of the water lost, 90km3, or about 60%, was due to reductions in groundwater.
The chances of countries going to war over water were slim – at least over the next decade, the national intelligence report said. But it warned ominously: "As water shortages become more acute beyond the next 10 years, water in shared basins will increasingly be used as leverage; the use of water as a weapon or to further terrorist objectives will become more likely beyond 10 years." Gleick predicted such conflicts would take other trajectories. He expected water tensions would erupt on a more local scale. "I think the biggest worry today is sub-national conflicts – conflicts between farmers and cities, between ethnic groups, between pastoralists and farmers in Africa, between upstream users and downstream users on the same river," said Gleick. "We have more tools at the international level to resolve disputes between nations. We have diplomats. We have treaties. We have international organisations that reduce the risk that India and Pakistan will go to war over water but we have far fewer tools at the sub-national level."
“A lot of times we believe that scarcity drives conflict,” said Aaron Wolf, professor and department chair of geosciences at Oregon State University, when in fact, “scarcity is not the sole driver of conflict; it’s not even the primary driver of conflict.” Wolf directs the school’s Program in Water Conflict Management and Transformation and has been at the forefront of major efforts to understand and address international water conflict. “What we found in the Basins at Risk study was that if you have a rapid change that exceeds the institutional capacity to absorb the change, that’s where you find conflict,” he said. In practice, this means the management of shared water resources is as much about governance mechanisms as it is about geography
Also affecting water management is the issue of the lack of transparency about water rights and private sector contracts that can mask preferential treatment or corrupt governance, the report says. “Corruption can increase marginalization and exploitation of disadvantaged and vulnerable populations,” it notes.
A number critiques have been leveled against both the theory and the empirical evidence behind the water wars hypothesis. One critique of the environmental security literature, of which much of the published material on water wars is guilty, is that warnings and threats of future violence are often considered as evidence.28 Statements from the 1980s that the next war in the Middle East will be over water have already proven false. Research has shown, however, that even the more general predictions of imminent water wars that are based on comments by officials may be suspect. Leng, for instance, found no correlation between the frequency of threats of war and the onset of war.29 Examining conflict and cooperation over water resources, Yoffe and colleagues noted over 400 incidents of water-related verbal exchanges by political figures between 1948 and 1999 that were conflictual in nature, but only 37 instances of violent conflict of varying levels of intensity. Thirty of these were from the Middle East, none were [End Page 15] more recent than 1970, none were all-out wars, and in none was water the central cause of conflict.30Proponents of water war scenarios often premise their dire conclusions on the fact that water is essential for life and non-substitutable.31 Yet water for basic needs represents a small share of total water use, even in arid countries.32 Economists and others point out that over 80 percent of world freshwater withdrawals are for the agricultural sector, a relatively low-value use and one in which large gains in efficiency could be made by changes in irrigation techniques and choice of crops. Thus, economic critiques of the water war hypothesis stress that the value of water that would be gained from military conflict is unlikely to outweigh the economic costs of military preparation and battle, much less the loss of life.33¶ Some authors have even questioned the empirical basis for the conclusion that freshwater is increasingly scarce, 34 an assumption on which the water war hypothesis relies. Such a “cornucopian” view claims that people adapt to scarcity through improvements in technology, pricing, and efficiency—rendering water less scarce, not more so.¶ Perhaps the strongest case against the likelihood of water wars is the lack of empirical evidence of precedents. Wolf found only one documented case of war explicitly over water, and this took place over 4500 years ago.35 Moreover, he could document only seven cases of acute conflict over water. Yoffe and colleagues also find that armed conflict over water resources has been uncommon.36 They found that cooperation was much more common than conflict, both globally and in all world regions except the Middle East/North Africa. This pattern may explain why only a limited number of case studies of water conflict are presented in the water wars literature.¶ Analysts have criticized environmental security arguments that are based on case studies because such works tend to have no variation in the dependent variable.37 Many large sample statistical studies have attempted to address such shortcomings, however, in several cases these studies too have come under fire. For instance, a number of large-sample statistical studies find correlations between water-related variables and conflict, however, few, if any, provide convincing support for causal relationships. Moreover, several studies found that water availability had no impact on the likelihood of either domestic or international conflict, 38 including at least one study that attempted to replicate earlier studies [End Page 16] that claimed to have found such correlations.39 Moreover, the results of several studies that do find correlations between water and conflict are either not robust or are contrasted by other findings. For instance, Raleigh and Urdal find that the statistical significance of water scarcity variables is highly dependent on one or two observations, leading them to conclude that actual effects of water scarcity “are weak, negligible or insignificant.”40 Jensen and Gleditsch find that the results of Miguel and colleagues are less robust when using a recoding of the original dataset.41 Gleditsch and colleagues found that shared basins do predict an increased propensity for conflict, but found no correlation between conflict and drought, the number of river crossings, or the share of the basin upstream, leading them to state that “support for a scarcity theory of water conflict is somewhat ambiguous.”42
“Water wars”, “the Blue Gold rush”, “the century of water wars”: These threatening formulas have emerged over the past few years. Future conflicts of varying intensity are predicted, and the control of hydra resources is at stake. The 20th century was supposedly that of the black gold wars. Ecological concerns have thus driven futurologists to dub the 21st century “the century of blue gold wars.” So many wars are in sight! One can live without petroleum, but not without water. Yet when looking at things from a historical perspective, one must consider these tragic predictions in context. The enumeration of the acts of violence that are directly linked to the control of aquifers since ancient times leads after much pain to a shorter list of less intense eruptions of violence, including riots and skirmishes between various villages . These are almost systematically localized, isolated, popular acts of violence. Governments are seemingly unwilling to allow themselves to be dragged into conflicts triggered by local problems. The paradox is as follows: The only resource that is indispensable for life generates minor tensions, whereas non-necessary, and even superfluous, resources have given rise to conflicts and inequalities, leading economists to speak of a “natural resources curse.” This paradox prevails among Middle Eastern leaders. “With water you can make politics. With land you can make war,” said Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu during a seminar on the sustainable management of water in 1995 . Israeli and Palestinian officials make only a marginal reference to the water issue in their public speeches. This is a long way behind the issue of security for the Israelis, and the issues of refugees, settlements and the status of Jerusalem for the Palestinians. One should certainly keep in mind that such a statement by the Israeli prime minister was politically motivated, but this position is symptomatic of the symbolic value of “land” and the instrumental value of “water”. Nevertheless, one should keep in mind that while water is, in all likelihood, not an issue in a future war, it is still a herald of peace. In fact, North Africa and the Arabian Peninsula are the most arid regions of the globe. In the Middle East, Turkey, Iraq, Lebanon and Israel are the only countries that are relatively spared from water shortages. Syria is in a situation of hydric stress. In other words, according to the United Nations, available resources are estimated between 1,000 and 1,700 m3 per individual per year. Other countries in the region suffer from hydric shortage (less than 1,000 m3 per individual per year). The average level of water resources in the region hovers around 1,400 m3 per individual per year. This level will witness a 50% decrease by 2025 due to population growth. Agriculture squanders up to 90% of freshwater supplies compared to a world average of 70% , while industry and domestic use make up the remaining 10%. One of the most contentious issues in the region is Israel’s water consumption, which is several times higher than that of its neighbors due to treaties that grant it privileged access to the region’s hydric resources. Yet these tensions do not underlie the disputes between those countries. The unequal division of water resources is actually just one dimension of these disputes, and not necessarily a dimension that drives crises to escalate.
7. Conclusions This research has tried to find an answer to the question whether in the future it is plausible that in the Euphrates­Tigris water basin a war will be caused by water scarcity. The focus has been on the Euphrates­Tigris river basin because it is situated in a region that is rife with conflict and is mentioned in academic literature as the basin were violent conflict caused by water scarcity is plausible. The result of this research can be divided into three parts: the major developments for the coming 20­40 years, the political consequences of these developments, and to what extent this will increase the risk for water­related conflict. This research started by distinguishing the different forms and levels of water scarcity in order to understand the causes and consequences. Scarcity induced conflict is not the direct result of environmental deprivation but it is influenced by the social and political factors attached to the use of a certain resource. We also distinguished that water scarcity can either be a demand or a supply problem. Concerning the major developments in the coming 20­40 years, we saw that developments will take place that will cause, or increase, both the demand and supply side of the water scarcity problem in the region. Major contributing factors to future water scarcity are the expected population growth and the effects of environmental change such as the alteration of the local climate. In essence this means that in the future there will be less water available, which will be used by more people. The Euphrates and Tigris are unmistakably important for all of the riparians who rely on the rivers for hydropower, irrigation water, and water for domestic use. Syria and Iraq rely heavily on the rivers' water since there are little alternative sources of fresh water in their territory. For water withdrawal the downstream riparians are dependent on the goodwill of the upstream riparians. Turkey can decide to restrict the flow of the water on both rivers since it is the upstream country, while Syria can decide to withdraw more water from the Euphrates which will leave less to use for Iraq. Reducing the flow of the river often leads to firm reactions. Water is a vital resource for the well­being of the individual and society, and in an arid area such as the Middle East the availability of sufficient water can be viewed as a matter of national security. Some suggest that due to the fact that water is essential for mankind this resource is prone to conflict and this potential will be unleashed in circumstances of increased scarcity. In academic literature a number of factors are given that will add to the conflict potential of a situation. This research found that a majority of these factors are present in the river basin region and that some of them might have an increasing influence due to the absence of sufficient coping mechanisms such as institutions and cooperative initiatives. The role of these factors is likely to increase in the future due to the given circumstances. This research used four scenarios in order to see how these factors interact with the social and political circumstances and to check whether the political consequences would give indication to suspect a violent escalation of the situation by 2030­2050. This research found that only under the circumstances of one scenario there will be an increased risk on violent conflict and that there will be a large possibility that one of the downstream riparians might use force in order to secure its water resources. This scenario included that this riparian must believe that its military is stronger and military action would only be logical if it followed after a significant restriction of the flow of river water. The other outcomes of the scenarios were much more positive. In all the cases the conclusion was that conflict is not very likely, even with remaining hostile tensions between some of the riparians. Military action in order to secure water resources is only viable when there are no other solutions. It is much cheaper to solve the problem by peaceful means such as diplomacy or by using technologies, than by initiating a military operation which will bring about large costs. In the one scenario where violent conflict is possible, the initial action would only concern the destruction of water infrastructure. Is cooperation a more likely outcome? In some scenarios it is, but the intensity of these cooperative initiatives differ per scenario. In one scenario this research found that closer cooperation between the riparians would be a logical result of the given circumstances. This development would be mainly caused by the improved relations between the riparians. The remaining two scenarios also show no significant signs that the chance of violent conflict would increase although there are no significant signs either suggesting cooperation as a more likely outcome. In one case the river basin would be regulated by the strong hegemonic position of Turkey, while in the other
Westerners eager to promote democracy must be wary of African politicians who promise democratic reform without sincere commitment to the process. Offering money to corrupt leaders in exchange for their taking small steps away from autocracy may in fact be a way of pushing countries into anocracy. As such, world financial lenders and interventionists who wield leverage and influence must take responsibility in considering the ramifications of African nations who adopt democracy in order to maintain elite political privileges. The obvious reason for this, aside from the potential costs in human life should conflict arise from hastily constructed democratic reforms, is the fact that Western donors, in the face of intrastate war would then be faced with channeling funds and resources away from democratization efforts and toward conflict intervention based on issues of human security. This is a problem, as Western nations may be increasingly wary of intervening in Africa hotspots after experiencing firsthand the unpredictable and unforgiving nature of societal warfare in both Somalia and Rwanda. On a costbenefit basis, the West continues to be somewhat reluctant to get involved in Africa’s dirty wars, evidenced by its political hesitation when discussing ongoing sanguinary grassroots conflicts in Africa. Even as the world apologizes for bearing witness to the Rwandan genocide without having intervened, the U nited S tates, recently using the label ‘genocide’in the context of the Sudanese conflict (in September of 2004), has only proclaimed sanctions against Sudan, while dismissing any suggestions at actual intervention (Giry, 2005). Part of the problem is that traditional military and diplomatic approachs at separating combatants and enforcing ceasefires have yielded little in Africa. No powerful nations want to get embroiled in conflicts they cannot win – especially those conflicts in which the intervening nation has very little interest.
A blasting of mushroom cloud, an explosion of hot air and a flash of light: All this is enough to leave people horrified. However, a new study discloses that there is much more to a nuclear war that one cannot even think about. In fact, novelists and filmmakers have been tackling this crucial subject for decades and many are clear in their approach and some just confronting it.
What is the current probability of an asteroid striking Earth? Depends on the size. Little ones hit every day. A city killer once or twice a century. Extinction event about every 100 million years (it’s been 66 million years). These, of course, are averages. We could get an extinction event tomorrow — or not for 200 million years. Fortunately, we know where almost all of the big asteroids (extinction event) that could hit Earth are and none of them will hit us for at least 100 years. We don’t know where 90% of the somewhat smaller asteroids are — ones that could devastate a region (say, the Eastern seaboard). We only know the location of 1% of the city killers. Even better, if we detect an incoming asteroid in time we could deflect it. Thus, if we were to mount a vigorous detection campaign we could make the probability essentially zero. This would cost around 1% of our civil space program budget. See http://space.alglobus.net/papers/PlanetaryDefensePolicy2014.pdf which is close to the NSS position on the matter.
The U.N. plans to set up an “International Asteroid Warning Group” for member nations to share information about potentially hazardous space rocks. If astronomers detect an asteroid that poses a threat to Earth, the U.N.’s Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space will help coordinate a mission to launch a spacecraft to slam into the object and deflect it from its collision course. Lu and other members of the Association of Space Explorers (ASE) recommended these steps to the U.N. as a first step to address at the long-neglected problem of errant space rocks. “No government in the world today has explicitly assigned the responsibility for planetary protection to any of its agencies,” ASE member Rusty Schweickart, who flew on the Apollo 9 mission in 1969, said Friday at the American Museum of Natural History. “NASA does not have an explicit responsibility to deflect an asteroid, nor does any other space agency.” The ASE advocates that each nation delegate responsibility for dealing with a potential asteroid impact to an internal agency—before the event is upon us.
Scientists hope Sentinel and other asteroid-hunting instruments will spot dangerous NEOs several decades before they could potentially slam into Earth. That's enough lead time to mount a successful deflection effort, which would likely involve launching two separate space missions, former Apollo astronaut and B612 co-founder and chairman emeritus Rusty Schweickart told SPACE.com earlier this year. The first mission, he said, would send a robotic probe on a collision course with the asteroid, knocking it off course via kinetic impact. The second would follow up, launching a "gravity tractor" spacecraft to fly along with the space rock, nudging it further via a tiny but consistent gravitational tug. Such a strategy would probably work on asteroids up to 1,300 feet (400 m) wide, Schweickart said at the Oct. 25 press conference. Anything bigger than that likely demands a different response, he added, such as a series of kinetic impacts or blasting the asteroid with a nuclear bomb. Colossal asteroid impacts that cause mass extinctions are extremely rare events. For example, strikes like the one that killed off the dinosaurs (and roughly 80 percent of all Earth's species) 65 million years ago happen roughly once every 100 million years, Schweickart said. But smaller (and much more frequent) strikes can still be devastating. In 1908, an object thought to be just 130 feet (40 m) wide, or perhaps even smaller, exploded above the Podkamennaya Tunguska River in Siberia, flattening roughly 770 square miles (2,000 square km) of forest. Impacts like the "Tunguska Event" — which would have destroyed New York City, Tokyo or any other metropolis if they had been in the asteroid's crosshairs — occur once every 300 years on average, Schweickart said. So it makes sense to focus on city-killers and other relatively small asteroids rather than the behemoths when thinking about how to deflect space rocks — especially since the true giants are so easy to spot. "We're not going to be surprised by something that large," Schweickart said of asteroids like the dinosaur-killer. "We will have lots of time to worry about it, or mix our martinis, or whatever we're going to do."
While there is no known cure for cancer, a flurry of FDA approval requests to treat the most threatening cancer cases has researchers optimistic that progress is being made toward an eventual cure.
Several people reported this headline to me: For First Time Since WWII There Are More Than 50 Million Refugees. My first thought was directed at the UN—”liar, liar, pants on fire!”—but maybe I should be directing my annoyance at the AP reporters and the headline writer because I wondered how that 50 million “refugees” jives with the Pew study (using UN numbers) that says the number of refugees is down to between 10 and 12 million from a peak in the early 90s of 18 million. (see graph below right) Here is the story, hat tip Judy, that I wasn’t going to waste my time on, but since it is everywhere, I will (waste my time) and post it: TAZA KHORMATO, Iraq (AP) — In a battered car loaded with blankets and clothes, Hassan Abbas and his mother left a dusty town in northern Iraq, fleeing this week’s violence and joining what the United Nations says is the largest worldwide population of displaced people since World War II. The U.N. refugee agency’s latest annual report, released Friday, found more than 50 million people worldwide were displaced at the end of last year, reflecting an ever-expanding web of international conflicts. Last year’s increase in displaced people was the largest in at least two decades, driven mainly by the civil war in Syria, which has claimed an estimated 160,000 lives and forced 9 million people to flee their homes. Now Iraq is adding to that tide. Notice the word “displaced”—that does not mean they are by definition all “refugees.” Twenty paragraphs into the story we learn this: Of 51.2 million displaced people worldwide last year, 16.7 million were refugees outside their countries’ borders. More than half of the refugees under UNHCR’s care — 6.3 million — had been in exile for more than five years, the agency said. That 16.7 million is likely inflated as well, but even so it is still LESS than the peak in the early 1990′s of 18 million.
I have just finished reading another large pile of articles about the topic and listening to various speeches. And the elements of hype and carelessness I have come across are increasing. All sorts of things are thrown together under the banner of climate change as if it is responsible for all of the world's problems. From a practical viewpoint, it is impossible to unravel what is caused by weather fluctuations, the lack of economic growth or failed government policy -- to say nothing of proving the current effects of structural changes in the climate. For example, everyone quotes the number of "200 million climate refugees". But closer examination reveals that migrants name drought as the least important reason for leaving their country. If at all. Even where drought is involved, it cannot be determined with certainty that it is due to climate change, because weather fluctuations happen all the time. There are authors who claim that fertile land has already been lost to the rising sea level, a claim for which there is little evidence. I also regularly read articles stating that climate change is leading to a decrease in food production and is behind the recent explosion in food prices. That notion that food production will decrease in the long term is still questionable -- in some areas production could even increase, and recent price increases have nothing to do with climate change. Such a suggestion is misleading at best, if not fraudulent. And then there are the politicians who repeatedly state that we cannot continue with business as usual, like the Polish president said last week. But we are long past that point. Sustainable production has penetrated our way of thinking. It is not enough by any stretch of the imagination, but you can't maintain that we haven't learned anything.
Climate dangers The third avenue for concern about coming resource wars is through the dangers of global climate change. The litany is now familiar. Sea levels will rise, perhaps a lot; storms will probably become more intense; dry areas are prone to parch further and wet zones are likely to soak longer. And on top of those probable effects, unchecked climate change raises the odds of suffering nasty surprises if the world's climate and ecosystems respond in abrupt ways. Adding all that together, the scenarios are truly disturbing. Meaningful action to stem the dangers is long overdue. In the United States over the last year, the traditional security community has become engaged on these issues. Politically, that conversion has been touted as good news because the odds of meaningful policy are higher if hawks also favor action. Their concerns are seen through the lens of resource wars, with fears such as: water shortages that amplify grievances and trigger conflict;  migrations of "climate refugees", which could stress border controls and also cause strife if the displaced don't fit well in their new societies; and diseases such as malaria that could be harder to contain if tropical conditions are more prevalent, which in turn could stress health-care systems and lead to hot wars. While there are many reasons to fear global warming, the risk that such dangers could cause violent conflict ranks extremely low on the list because it is highly unlikely to materialize. Despite decades of warnings about water wars, what is striking is that water wars don't happen - usually because countries that share water resources have a lot more at stake and armed conflict rarely fixes the problem. Some analysts have pointed to conflicts over resources, including water and valuable land, as a cause in the Rwandan genocide, for example. Recently, the UN secretary-general suggested that climate change was already exacerbating the conflicts in Sudan. But none of these supposed causal chains stay linked under close scrutiny - the conflicts over resources are usually symptomatic of deeper failures in governance and other primal forces for conflicts, such as ethnic tensions, income inequalities and other unsettled grievances. Climate is just one of many factors that contribute to tension. The same is true for scenarios of climate refugees, where the moniker "climate" conveniently obscures the deeper causal forces. The dangers of disease have caused particular alarm in the advanced industrialized world, partly because microbial threats are good fodder for the imagination. But none of these scenarios hold up because the scope of all climate-sensitive diseases is mainly determined by the prevalence of institutions to prevent and contain them rather than the raw climatic factors that determine where a disease might theoretically exist. For example, the threat industry has flagged the idea that a growing fraction of the United States will be malarial with the higher temperatures and increased moisture that are likely to come with global climate change. Yet much of the American South is already climatically inviting for malaria, and malaria was a serious problem as far north as Chicago until treatment and eradication programs started in the 19th century licked the disease. Today, malaria is rare in the industrialized world, regardless of climate, and whether it spreads again will hinge on whether governments stay vigilant, not so much on patterns in climate. If Western countries really cared about the spread of tropical diseases and the stresses they put on already fragile societies in the developing world, they would redouble their efforts to tame the diseases directly (as some are now doing) rather than imagining that efforts to lessen global warming will do the job. Eradication usually depends mainly on strong and responsive governments, not the bugs and their physical climate.
A world without honeybees would also mean a world without fruits, vegetables, nuts, and seeds. Nearly one-third of the world's crops are dependent on honeybees for pollination, but over the last decade the black-and-yellow insects have been dying at unprecedented rates both in the United States and abroad. [Jump straight to the photos] Pesticides, disease, parasites, poor weather, and the stress of being trucked from orchard-to-orchard to pollinate different crops all play a role in the decline of managed honeybee populations. A lack of bees threatens farmers who depend on these nectar- and pollen-eating animals for their pollination services. We have few planned defenses against a honeybee disaster. The Farm Bill, passed on June 10, 2013, allocates less than $2 million a year in emergency assistance to honeybees. "The bottom line is, if something is not done to improve honeybee health, then most of the interesting food we eat is going to be unavailable," warns Carlen Jupe, secretary and treasurer for the California State Beekeepers Association. Honeybees as a species are not in danger of extinction, but their ability to support the industry of commercial pollination, and by extension, a large portion of our food supply, is in serious danger. Whole Foods recently imagined what our grocery store would like in a world without bees by removing more than half of the market's produce. Here, we also take a purely hypothetical look at how the human diet and lifestyle would change if honeybees and other bee pollinators disappeared from our planet one day. This is the worst case scenario — it's possible that human ingenuity and alternate pollinators can mitigate some of these outcomes, but not necessarily all of them.
The same holds true for a number of human rights treaties that the Senate has refused to ratify, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the Convention on the Rights of Persons With Disabilities, among others. Each agreement establishes a committee of experts to monitor compliance and interpret provisions, and although none issues binding decisions, they influence policymakers worldwide, as well as judges in domestic and international courts. Because it has no voice on these committees, the United States cannot influence the course of the law, even by dissent. Even when the Senate does approve a human rights treaty, it often adds conditions that forfeit the United States' ability to influence the law, a subtle form of rejection. For example, when the Senate approved the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (in 1992) and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (in 1994), it did so only after securing reservations that stipulated that the treaties would have no legal force in U.S. courts absent further congressional or state action. As a result, when it comes to a wide range of human rights issues covered by these treaties--such as protections against torture, the right to a fair trial, freedom of expression, religious liberty, the right to political participation, and so on-the United States lacks a formal mechanism to affect how other states and international courts interpret the evolving norms. U.S. judges interpret similar federal and state constitutional provisions, but they rarely influence the broader efforts to embed human rights norms in the laws of foreign countries. Unlike U.S. judges, foreign judges in domestic and international courts-most prominent among them the European Court of Human Rights-are guiding the development of human rights law around the world. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights, for example, interprets basic norms of human rights law, creating an extensive jurisprudence that has a pronounced effect on states' behavior, but the United States has failed to ratify the treaty that established it. And so Washington stands beyond the court's jurisdiction, with the result that it cannot nominate U.S. judges to the court, who could then participate as the court develops human rights law in the Americas. There is a more direct concern, too. One might think that these kinds of courts cannot influence the United States, but in an era when Americans travel and live and work around the globe, the norms these courts shape might ultimately be applied by foreign national courts, and legitimately so, to U.S. citizens. In a similar vein, Washington's failure to ratify the 1998 Rome Statute, which established the ice, will probably reduce the United States' influence on the development of the law governing war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide. In particular, Washington cannot nominate judges to the tribunal. That's a problem, because the court is likely to address legal issues that implicate U.S. concerns, such as rules about targeting and detaining combatants, even though Americans would rarely, if ever, find themselves subject to the ice's jurisdiction. To get a sense of how this might work, consider the fact that besides Turkey, the United States is the only NATO member not to have accepted the Rome Statute. If the ice's jurisprudence evolves in ways that diverge from U.S. interpretations of the law of armed conflict, NATO states may find themselves slowly but inexorably coming to different views of the law's requirements. Such legal divisions could create real conflict in joint operations, limiting the U.S. military's ability to do things it believes are lawful. Although U.S. judges would not necessarily adopt the same positions as the U.S. government, they would, more than others, intuitively understand the Pentagon's concerns in an area of law that balances military and humanitarian interests.
Before we proceed with our analysis, it is important to note the special characteristics of human rights regimes that bracket our discussion and that make the investigation of socialization processes especially productive in this arena. Most international regimes seek to facilitate cooperation or coordination among states. 11 The global promotion of human rights, however, is importantly different from both types of regimes. 12 For several reasons, the prevalence of human rights violations is not reducible to a simple collective action problem. First, states have substantial capacity to promote and protect human rights within their territory without coordinating their efforts with [*629] other states. Without question, states retain some substantial measure of effective autonomy in this area. Second, many states have little clear interest in promoting and protecting human rights abroad. Although "bad actors" impose externalities on other states in extreme cases (for example, when poor human rights conditions trigger massive refugee flows), these externalities arise only sporadically and typically affect only a few (bordering) states. Third, many states have no interest in promoting and protecting human rights domestically. Some states are simply willing to violate human rights when it is convenient to do so, and they have no interest in accepting structural commitments that may alter their current decision processes. Indeed, one of the central regime design problems in human rights law is how best to influence "bad actors" to make fundamental changes. The question whether international law can promote human rights norms may be recast, in an important sense, as how human rights regimes can best harness the mechanisms of social influence. The task of designing effective human rights regimes is further complicated by several structural characteristics of international society that undercut the potential effectiveness of some strategies. Consider two. First, international human rights norms are not self-enforcing. 13 This point issues from the fact that human rights regimes do not address coordination problems and that states have no clear, direct interest in securing human rights protection in other states. Second, good faith participants in such regimes are generally unwilling or unable to shoulder the enforcement costs necessary to coerce recalcitrant states to comply with human rights norms. This "enforcement deficit" - exacerbated by high enforcement costs and negligible direct returns - is a political reality of the current international order.
Scholars of international relations, particularly within the realist and neoliberal traditions, expect this compliance gap between states’ commitment to international law and states’ practices. Theses mainstream international relations perspectives often regard the growing legalization of human rights principles as epiphenomenal (Mearsheimer 1994/1995); or, they assume that states only comply with the principles of international law when it is in their national interest and when international institutions are designed to enforce observance of law (Downs, Rocke, and Barsoom 1996). In short, the rationalist tradition has led scholars to expect that the human rights regime has little impact on actual human rights practices. Treaties are simply not designed to make ratifying governments accountable for their commitments.
A California-based startup has developed a flexible, long-lasting and rechargeable battery that could have wide-reaching applications within medical devices, wearable sensors and even on-body electronics. Imprint Energy aims to overcome what it sees as the longstanding limitations of currently available battery technologies which hamper the advancement of portable electronics. The company intends to achieve this through its zinc-polymer batteries, which offer numerous size, cost and safety benefits to traditional lithium-based batteries. flexible battery wearable "Imprint Energy will address these shortcomings with its breakthrough zinc-based rechargeable battery technology, ZincPoly," the firm says in its mission statement. "(ZincPoly) enables the production of ultrathin, flexible, high energy density rechargeable batteries for significantly lower cost and without the design limitations of safety concerns of other battery technologies." The batteries can be printed on sheets by widely-used industrial screen printers, allowing for customisable product designs. Weird wearables Company co-founder Christine Ho developed the technology while she was still a graduate student at the University of California. The non-toxic, non-volatile properties of the batteries that Ho developed meant that they were safe to use, even within a bio-electronic context, such as implanted medical devices. Related Solar Cells Integrated Into Fabrics Could Power Wearable Electronics Wearable Tech Improves Efficiency in the Workplace The zinc-based batteries have since been tested on wrist-worn devices but Ho claims that they could potentially be used even on "weird parts of your body like your eye". Imprint energy recently secured $6million (£3.5m) in Series A funding from Phoenix Venture Partners, Flextronics and AME Cloud in order to advance product development. It is also hoped that the proceeds and partners will assist the company in establishing itself in the wearable electronics and Internet of Things markets. Brooks Kincaid, co-founder and president of Imprint Energy, said: "Flextronics provides us with an attractive channel to potential customers and brings a wealth of experience in design, manufacturing and logistics that will help us scale."
The race to control the world’s biggest source of lithium used in everything from iPad batteries to electric cars and everyday drugs is on. Albemarle Corp. agreed today to pay $6.2 billion in cash and stock for Princeton, New Jersey-based Rockwood Holdings Inc., the largest lithium producer. Rockwood is one of four companies that control about 90 percent of the market for lithium. Demand for the metal will expand as much as three times faster than the overall economy, Baton Rogue, Louisiana-based Albemarle said today in an investor presentation. “Growth in lithium will come from the continued proliferation of electronic devices as well as energy storage, with the prospects for battery growth within the automotive industry especially attractive,” Albemarle Chief Executive Officer Luke Kissam told analysts on a conference call. “We are going to see an inflection point in lithium.” Other lithium producers are just as bullish. The world market may double in a decade with demand growing at 7 to 10 percent annually, Chile’s Soc. Quimica & Minera de Chile SA said in April. Tesla Motor Inc. the carmaker led by Elon Musk, plans a battery “gigafactory” that may consume as much as 17 percent of current lithium output, Goldman Sachs Group Inc. said in February. Tesla said in March that the $5 billion plant will only use only raw materials sourced in North America. The Albemarle deal is the latest example of consolidation in the highly concentrated lithium industry. In 2012, China’s Chengdu Tianqi Industry Group Co. agreed to buy Australia’s Talison Lithium Ltd., owner of the world’s largest open-pit lithium mine. Chengdu later agreed to sell a stake in the mine to Rockwood, which had unsuccessfully bid for Talison. Talison, Rockwood, Philadelphia-based FMC Corp. and SQM control about 90 percent of worldwide lithium production, according to Jefferies & Co. Albemarle agreed to pay $50.65 in cash and 0.4803 of a share for each Rockwood share. That values Rockwood at $85.53 a share, or 13 percent more than yesterday’s closing price, the companies said in a statement. Bank of America Merrill Lynch is providing financing for the cash portion of the deal, which is expected to close in the first quarter of 2015. Albemarle investors will own 70 percent of the combined company and Rockwood holders the rest. Albemarle’s Kissam will be CEO. Albemarle said the deal isn’t contingent on the completion of Huntsman Corp.’s planned acquisition of Rockwood’s titanium- dioxide business. Today’s deal is the largest takeover of a diversified chemicals company since Solvay SA bought Rhodia SA in 2011, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. It will add to Albemarle’s cash earnings per share in the first year, according to the statement. Albemarle expects about $100 million in cost savings by 2016. Rockwood rose 12 percent to $84.95 at 9:58 a.m. in New York while Albemarle was up 0.8 percent at $73.18.
The development of this emerging field has been fostered by significant and sustained public investments in nanotechnology R&D. Nanotechnology R&D is directed toward the understanding and control of matter at dimensions of roughly 1 to 100 nanometers. At this size, the properties of matter can differ in fundamental and potentially useful ways from the properties of individual atoms and molecules and of bulk matter. Since the launch of the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) in 2000 through FY2011, Congress has appropriated approximately $14.2 billion for nanotechnology R&D, including approximately $1.8 billion in FY2011 funding under the current continuing resolution (P.L. 111-322). More than 60 nations have established similar programs. In 2006 alone, total global public R&D investments reached an estimated $6.4 billion, complemented by an estimated private sector investment of $6.0 billion. Data on economic outputs used to assess competitiveness in mature technologies and industries, such as revenues and market share, are not available for assessing nanotechnology.
Many other nations and firms around the world are also making substantial investments in nanotechnology to reap its potential benefits. With so much potentially at stake, some members of Congress have expressed interest and concerns about the U.S. competitive position in nanotechnology R&D and success in translating R&D results to commercial products.
Three NNI Signature Initiatives4 (a) Sustainable Nanomanufacturing — $84 million with participation from DOD, DOE, IC/DNI, NASA, NIOSH, NIST, NSF and USDA/FS. This initiative aims to establish manufacturing technologies for economical and sustainable integration of nanoscale building blocks into complex, large-scale systems, with two areas of focus: design of scalable and sustainable nanomaterials, components, devices, and processes; and nanomanufacturing measurement technologies. are planned with a total budget of $306 million: (b) Nanotechnology for Solar Energy Collection and Conversion — $112 million with participation from DOD, DOE, IC/DNI, NASA, NIST, NSF, and USDA/NIFA. The primary aim of this initiative is to use nanotechnology to improve photovoltaic solar electricity generation, solar thermal energy generation and conversion, and solar-to-fuel conversions. (c) Nanoelectronics for 2020 and Beyond — $110 million with participation from DOD, DOE, IC/DNI, NASA, NIST and NSF. The initiative aims to explore new or alternative “state variables” for computing; merge nanophotonics with nanoelectronics; explore carbonbased nanoelectronics; exploit nanoscale processes and phenomena for quantum information science; and augment the national nanoelectronics research and manufacturing infrastructure network (university-based infrastructure).
With all of the benefits and risks associated with nanotechnology most people don't seem too concerned about it. A recent study conducted by the National Science Foundation discovered that more than 67 percent of the people who responded to a survey expressed positive views of nanotechnology and said it would be likely to improve their lives, particularly in the medical arena. About 37 percent said the main risks were unexpected consequences and harmful side effects. Another 13 percent said it was weaponization and 9 percent thought medical and environmental contamination were the main risks. At 5 percent or less people felt privacy, expense and product failure concerns were risk factors. When it came to regulation about 50 percent said government regulation is necessary to address safety concerns. The researchers recruited and surveyed a panel of 76 adults over the course of 32 months. These individuals included community opinion leaders, environmental stakeholders, members of various church groups and other citizens. In addition to completing multiple surveys over time, the panelists also took part in structured interviews with open-ended questions on nanotechnology.
We've all been hearing about all kinds of ominous developments, and certainly the last few weeks have not been fertile ground for optimism. I was, therefore, surprised on going through energy statistics when I discovered the powerful trend that has recently emerged in the United States economy: Oil imports are going down at a steady pace. In fact, oil imports have plummeted. Net imports of oil and refined products (total imports of crude and refined products minus exports of crude and refined products) have declined from 12.363 million barrels per day in January and February 2006 to 7.784 million barrels per day in the same two months of 2012. While net import figures are not available for more recent time periods, other data suggests that the trend is continuing. During this same time period, net imports from Canada have actually been increasing from 2.227 million barrels per day in 2006 to 2.639 barrels per day in 2012. As a result, net imports from the rest of the world ex Canada have been cut almost in half from 10.336 million barrels per day in 2006 to 5.567 million barrels per day in 2012. There are a few complicated moving parts behind these numbers. There has been a huge increase (roughly a tripling) in the export of refined products from the United States. Apparently what has happened is that, as domestic demand for gasoline and distillate has declined, the U.S. refinery industry has more refinery capacity than is necessary for the U.S. market and is now refining crude oil in order to supply refined products to the export market. While total imports are down somewhat, net imports are down much more because of the large increase in exports of refined products. Behind this trend are several key developments. Domestic oil production has increased more than 1 million barrels per day during this time period (this increase in domestic oil production is an important part of the increased real GDP during this time period). In addition, despite the fact that real GDP has increased, domestic consumption of petroleum and petroleum products has decreased by more than 3 million barrels per day during the same time period. This appears to be partly due to increased production of ethanol (which displaces gasoline), increased vehicle mileage (as more fuel efficient new cars enter the market), less driving, relatively warm winters, and some displacement of oil by natural gas in the heating and transportation markets. These trends seem to be continuing and, while we still import a tremendous amount of oil, the strategic and economic vulnerability of the United States to the world oil market may be on the decline. What are the implications of this development for investors and for the country in general? First of all, it may produce a change in the nature of the business cycle. In the past, virtually every recession coincided with a run up in oil prices. Higher oil prices sucked dollars out of the U.S. economy and, at the same, created inflationary pressures which led to monetary tightening just as consumers had less money to spend because of higher gasoline prices. While U.S. gasoline prices will still be driven by world oil prices, a price increase will not suck as much money out of the domestic economy and will lead, instead, to a shifting around of wealth and economic activity within the United States (and its very economically integrated neighbor, Canada). Secondly, national security policy may be subject to a change in emphasis. To the degree that the United States is less vulnerable to an interruption in oil imports, we may see the use of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve as a price stabilizer rather than a true strategic backstop. In addition, the United States may pursue other goals in Middle Eastern policy with more determination. Of course, other countries are importing more and more oil all the time and we may come to a point at which China becomes a major player in the Middle East. Fourth and most importantly, I think that the trend illustrates the beginnings of a long-term displacement of petroleum by natural gas in the transportation market which will probably start in the more advanced economies. Natural gas has already displaced some 500,000 barrels of oil per month in the transportation market. This is a proverbial "drop in the bucket", but the trend is steady and powerful and companies like Clean Energy Fuels (CLNE) are poised to take advantage of the trend as it accelerates. Each economic recovery and expansion emphasizes certain sectors of the economy - tech in the 1990s, housing in the 2000s. It is likely that a renaissance in the U.S. energy industry will be an important part of any further leg up in the U.S. economy. Picking winners and losers within the industry is still difficult although the majors, including Exxon (XOM) and Conoco (COP), look very cheap at these price levels.
A recent study reiterated the conclusion that population growth ought to be controlled in order to combat global warming, and other world problems. I beg to differ. The authors of studies like these have exaggerated the benefits of population control, because they ignore some of the significant economic benefits of large populations. The director-general of Unicef has been quoted as saying, “Family planning could bring more benefits to more people at less cost than any other single technology now available to the human race.” And one of the benefits of reduced population, it is claimed, is reduced carbon emissions and therefore mitigation of climate change. This statement takes technology for granted, yet technology itself depends on population. Especially important among the sources of technical progress — discoveries — are trial and error, and incentives. Reasonable people can disagree about the relative importance of these two, but both are stimulated by population. The more people on earth, the greater the chance that one of them has an idea of how to improve alternative energies, or to mitigate the climate effects of carbon emissions. It takes only one person to have an idea that can benefit many. Plus, the more people on earth, the larger are the markets for new innovations. Thus, even if the brilliant innovators would be born regardless of population control, their incentives to devote effort toward finding new discoveries and bringing them to the marketplace depend on the size of that marketplace. And it’s clear that incentives matter for innovative activity: That’s why we have a patent system that helps innovators obtain financial rewards for their inventions. Not surprisingly, research has shown that market size stimulates innovative activity, as in the case of pharmaceutical research that is especially intense for conditions that have more victims. It may take a long time for population growth to either give birth to an inventor brilliant enough, or motivate enough incentives, to have an impact on the climate. But that’s not a reason to turn to population control, because it also takes a long time for population control’s impact to be noticeable. Although the calculations are inherently uncertain, the value of the additional innovation stimulated by additional population may be significant. In my academic work I have calculated that the value, to the entire marketplace through this channel, of an additional person may be on the same order of magnitude of the value that person places on his own life. For example, a person who can earn $2 million in his own lifetime may, by his presence in the worldwide marketplace, stimulate innovative activity that is worth a few hundred thousand dollars. The role of technical change has been repeatedly underestimated. For example, someone a century ago who claimed that the earth could have enough food to support nine billion people (population control advocates now think that the earth’s population can easily get there) would have been considered crazy. But with today’s technology it is easy to see how many billions can be fed. Some of the important solutions to climate change will also come from technological progress.
The idea that growing human numbers will destroy the planet is nonsense. But over-consumption will Many of today’s most-respected thinkers, from Stephen Hawking to David Attenborough, argue that our efforts to fight climate change and other environmental perils will all fail unless we “do something” about population growth. In the Universe in a Nutshell, Hawking declares that, “in the last 200 years, population growth has become exponential… The world population doubles every forty years.” But this is nonsense. For a start, there is no exponential growth. In fact, population growth is slowing. For more than three decades now, the average number of babies being born to women in most of the world has been in decline. Globally, women today have half as many babies as their mothers did, mostly out of choice. They are doing it for their own good, the good of their families, and, if it helps the planet too, then so much the better. Here are the numbers. Forty years ago, the average woman had between five and six kids. Now she has 2.6. This is getting close to the replacement level which, allowing for girls who don’t make it to adulthood, is around 2.3. As I show in my new book, Peoplequake, half the world already has a fertility rate below the long-term replacement level. That includes all of Europe, much of the Caribbean and the far east from Japan to Vietnam and Thailand, Australia, Canada, Sri Lanka, Turkey, Algeria, Kazakhstan, and Tunisia. It also includes China, where the state decides how many children couples can have. This is brutal and repulsive. But the odd thing is that it may not make much difference any more: Chinese communities around the world have gone the same way without any compulsion—Taiwan, Singapore, and even Hong Kong. When Britain handed Hong Kong back to China in 1997, it had the lowest fertility rate in the world: below one child per woman. So why is this happening? Demographers used to say that women only started having fewer children when they got educated and the economy got rich, as in Europe. But tell that to the women of Bangladesh, one of the world’s poorest nations, where girls are among the least educated in the world, and mostly marry in their mid-teens. They have just three children now, less than half the number their mothers had. India is even lower, at 2.8. Tell that also to the women of Brazil. In this hotbed of Catholicism, women have two children on average—and this is falling. Nothing the priests say can stop it. Women are doing this because, for the first time in history, they can. Better healthcare and sanitation mean that most babies now live to grow up. It is no longer necessary to have five or six children to ensure the next generation—so they don’t. There are holdouts, of course. In parts of rural Africa, women still have five or more children. But even here they are being rational. Women mostly run the farms, and they need the kids to mind the animals and work in the fields. Then there is the middle east, where traditional patriarchy still rules. In remote villages in Yemen, girls as young as 11 are forced into marriage. They still have six babies on average. But even the middle east is changing. Take Iran. In the past 20 years, Iranian women have gone from having eight children to less than two—1.7 in fact—whatever the mullahs say. The big story here is that rich or poor, socialist or capitalist, Muslim or Catholic, secular or devout, with or without tough government birth control policies in place, most countries tell the same tale of a reproductive revolution. That doesn’t mean population growth has ceased. The world’s population is still rising by 70m a year. This is because there is a time lag: the huge numbers of young women born during the earlier baby boom may only have had two children each. That is still a lot of children. But within a generation, the world’s population will almost certainly be stable, and is very likely to be falling by mid-century. In the US they are calling my new book “The Coming Population Crash.” Is this good news for the environment and for the planet’s resources? Clearly, other things being equal, fewer people will do less damage to the planet. But it won’t on its own do a lot to solve the world’s environmental problems, because the second myth about population growth is that it is the driving force behind our wrecking of the planet. In fact, rising consumption today far outstrips the rising headcount as a threat to the planet. And most of the extra consumption has been in rich countries that have long since given up adding substantial numbers to their population, while most of the remaining population growth is in countries with a very small impact on the planet. By almost any measure you choose, a small proportion of the world’s people take the majority of the world’s resources and produce the majority of its pollution. Let’s look at carbon dioxide emissions: the biggest current concern because of climate change. The world’s richest half billion people—that’s about 7 per cent of the global population—are responsible for half of the world’s carbon dioxide emissions. Meanwhile, the poorest 50 per cent of the population are responsible for just 7 per cent of emissions. Virtually all of the extra 2bn or so people expected on this planet in the coming 30 or 40 years will be in this poor half of the world. Stopping that, even if it were possible, would have only a minimal effect on global emissions, or other global threats. Ah, you say, but what about future generations? All those big families in Africa will have yet bigger families. Well, that’s an issue of course. But let’s be clear about the scale of the difference involved. The carbon emissions of one American today are equivalent to those of around four Chinese, 20 Indians, 30 Pakistanis, 40 Nigerians or 250 Ethiopians. A woman in rural Ethiopia can have ten children and, in the unlikely event that those ten children all live to adulthood and have ten children of their own, the entire clan of more than a hundred will still be emitting less carbon dioxide than you or me. It is over-consumption, not over-population that matters. Economists predict the world’s economy will grow by 400 per cent by 2050. If this does indeed happen, less than a tenth of that growth will be due to rising human numbers. True, some of those extra poor people might one day become rich. And if they do—and I hope they do—their impact on the planet will be greater. But it is the height of arrogance for us in the rich world to downplay the importance of our own environmental footprint because future generations of poor people might one day have the temerity to get as rich and destructive as us. How dare we? Some green activists need to take a long hard look at themselves. We all like to think of ourselves as progressives. But Robert Malthus, the man who first warned 200 years ago that population growth would produce demographic armageddon, was in his time a favourite of capitalist mill owners. He opposed Victorian charities because he said they were only making matters worse for the poor, encouraging them to breed. He said the workhouses were too lenient. Progressives of the day hated him. Charles Dickens attacked him in several books: when Oliver Twist asked for more gruel in the workhouse, for instance, that was a satire on a newly introduced get-tough law on workhouses, known popularly as Malthus’s Law. In Hard Times, the headmaster obsessed with facts, Thomas Gradgrind, had a son called Malthus. In A Christmas Carol, Ebenezer Scrooge was also widely seen at the time as a caricature of Malthus. Malthus, it should be remembered, spent many years teaching British colonial administrators before they went out to run the empire. They adopted his ideas that famine and disease were the result of overbreeding, so the victims should be allowed to die. It was Malthusian thinking that led to the huge and unnecessary death toll in the Irish potato famine. We must not follow the lure of Malthus, and blame the world’s poor for the environmental damaged caused overwhelmingly by us: the rich. The truth is that the population bomb is being defused round the world. But the consumption bomb is still primed and ever more dangerous.
Proclamations of overpopulation have circulated for decades. Are they true? First off, what is meant by the word “overpopulation”? It has nothing to do with the amount of people but rather to the resources and the capacity of the environment to sustain human activities. To be overpopulated, a nation must have insufficient food, resources and living space. With the world population at around 6.8 billion last year, food and living space are hardly a concern. In 1990, it was estimated that the world could feed up to 35 billion people. Most sources estimate that the global population will level out at around 9.2 billion in 2050, and then start to decline. Indian economist Raj Krishna estimates that India alone is capable of increasing crop yields to the point of providing the entire world’s food supply. Lack of food is not the problem but rather the need for more efficient distribution. Another supposed problem is living space. In 2003, the entire population of the world could fit inside the state of Arkansas. The world may seem crowded, but it’s because humans cluster together for trade and companionship, not for lack of room. Even so, there are those who insist that we will continue to breed exponentially, causing a population explosion. Paul Ehrlich first introduced this idea in 1968 with his book, “The Population Bomb.” It succeeded in scaring the masses, just as Thomas Malthus did, but these theories suffer under the impression that humans are the only thing fluctuating. “Population rose six-fold in the next 200 years. But this is an increase, not an explosion, because it has been accompanied, and in large part made possible, by a productivity explosion, a resource explosion, a food explosion, an information explosion, a communications explosion, a science explosion, and a medical explosion,” wrote community development specialist Abid Ullah Jan in an article published in 2003 called “Overpopulation: Myths, Facts, and Politics.” Poverty, too, is not the effect of overpopulation, but rather the aftermath of poor leadership. In Ethiopia, government officials are blamed for causing poverty by confiscating food and exporting it to buy arms. In Africa, economic problems are seen as a result of excessive government spending, taxes on farmers, inflation, trade restrictions and too much government ownership. Depopulation is more likely to cause economic distress than these other factors.
Overpopulation panic is back. Concerns about a world too full of “filthy human children” motivated eco-terrorist James Lee when he held employees of the Discovery Channel hostage at gunpoint in September. But the deranged Lee is far from alone when it comes to worrying about overpopulation. The May-June cover of the progressive magazine Mother Jones asked, “Who’s to Blame for the Population Crisis?” British journalist Matthew Parris wrote an op-ed in September in the London Times asserting, “If you want to save the planet, stop breeding.” Parris further coyly suggested that we study “China’s example, for lessons good and bad.” But on World Population Day in July, British journalist Fred Pearce argued that “population is not the problem.” Pearce’s relatively sanguine article at the environmentalist website Grist provoked Robert Walker, former head of the anti-gun group Handgun Control and now executive vice-president of the Population Institute, to respond at the same site with an article titled “Of course population is still a problem.” Walker asks Pearce what he evidently thinks are deep questions: “Looking ahead, Fred, will these countries [with anticipated population growth in Africa and Asia] be able to feed themselves? Will they have enough safe drinking water? Will their lands be deforested or their rivers polluted? Will their maternal mortality rates and infant mortality rates remain unacceptably high? Will they be caught in a demographic poverty trap? Will they become failed states? If you have good answers to these questions, please let me know.” Let’s take a stab at providing good answers to Walker’s questions. Will the world be able to feed itself in 2050? As it happens, the journal Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B (Biological Sciences) devoted its September 27 issue to analyzing the issue of global food security through 2050. One of the specially commissioned research articles projects that world population will reach around 9 billion by 2050 and that in the second half of the 21st century, “population stabilization and the onset of a decline are likely.” This should allay Ryerson’s concern that the world’s resources are not infinite and therefore “cannot support an infinite population of humans.” So okay, infinite human population growth isn’t likely, but can the Earth adequately feed 9 billion people by 2050? Well, yes, suggest two other of the Royal Society articles. A review of the relevant scientific literature led by Keith Jaggard from Rothamsted Research looks at the effects of climate change, CO2 increases, ozone pollution, higher average temperatures, and other factors on future crop production. Jaggard and his colleagues conclude [PDF], “So long as plant breeding efforts are not hampered and modern agricultural technology continues to be available to farmers, it should be possible to produce yield increases that are large enough to meet some of the predictions of world food needs, even without having to devote more land to arable agriculture.” Applying modern agricultural technologies more widely would go a long way toward boosting yields. For example, University of Minnesota biologist Ronald Phillips points out that India produces 31 bushels of corn per acre now which is at the same point U.S. yields were in the 1930s. Similarly, South Africa produces 40 bushels (U.S. 1940s yields); Brazil 58 bushels (U.S. 1950s yields); China 85 bushels (U.S. 1960s yields). Today’s modern biotech hybrids regularly produce more than 160 bushels of corn per acre in the Midwest. For what it’s worth, the corporate agriculture giant Monsanto is aiming to double yields on corn, soybeans, and cotton by 2030. Whether or not specific countries will be able to feed themselves has less to do with their population growth than it does with whether they adopt policies that retard their economic growth. Another article looking at the role of agricultural research and development finds that crop yields have been recently increasing at about 1 percent per year. In that article researchers estimate that spending an additional $5 to $10 billion per year would increase food output by 70 percent over the next 40 years. Note that world population is expected to increase by about 33 percent over that period. What about safe drinking water? Water is more problematic. The researchers commissioned by the Royal Society run a model that projects that competition for water to meet environmental flow requirements (EFRs) and municipal and industrial demand will “cause an 18 percent reduction if the availability of water worldwide for agriculture by 2050.” Interestingly, the amount of freshwater withdrawn for municipal and industrial use was 4.3 percent in 2000 and is estimated to increase to 5.9 percent by 2050. So the main competition for agricultural water is maintaining flows for environmental reasons. Since water is now often unpriced and subsidized, it gets used very inefficiently. As water becomes scarcer farmers and other users will have incentives to adopt water sparing techniques, such as drip irrigation. In addition, researchers are close to developing drought tolerant crops. The study also notes that water stressed regions will be able to “import water” in the form of food produced in areas with abundant water. With regard to deforestation and polluted rivers, the answer is probably yes for many of the poorest countries. However, speeding up economic growth and technological improvements will dramatically lower the risks of these undesirable outcomes. As noted above, enough food to feed 9 billion can be grown on land currently devoted to agriculture. With regard to water pollution, it is one of the first environmental problems that poor countries begin to clean up as they grow wealthier. A recent study found that in every country where average annual per capita income exceeds $4,600 forests are stable or increasing [PDF]. In addition, technological progress offers the possibility that humanity will increasingly reduce its future demands on nature by a process of dematerialization [PDF], that is, obtaining more value while using less material. Maternal mortality rates have fallen substantially—from 422 per 100,000 live births to 251 per 100,000 live births—over the past 30 years, according to a study published in The Lancet this past April. Sadly, the study noted, “More than 50% of all maternal deaths were in only six countries in 2008 (India, Nigeria, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Ethiopia, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo).” Oddly, some activists opposed the publication of The Lancet article, fearing that the good news would stifle their fundraising. The world’s infant mortality rate has never been lower. Most countries, even very poor countries, continue to experience declines in infant mortality. Walker’s last two questions about poverty traps and failed states are related, but not in a way that supports his implied points. As Wheaton College economist Seth Norton explains, "Fertility rate is highest for those countries that have little economic freedom and little respect for the rule of law.” He adds, "The relationship is a powerful one. Fertility rates are more than twice as high in countries with low levels of economic freedom and the rule of law compared to countries with high levels of those measures." Fertility rates are high in failed states like Somalia, Chad, Sudan, Pakistan, Nigeria, and Yemen, because of the lack of rule of law which inexorably generates poverty. Norton persuasively argues that such places are so chaotic that it’s like living in giant open access commons. In those cases people often reason that more children means more hands for grabbing unowned and unprotected resources for the family. Such anarchic places would be particularly ill-suited to implementing the kind of population control policies Walker favors. According to research published by the Royal Society, it looks as though the world will be able to feed 9 billion people by 2050, perhaps even allowing some farmland to revert to nature. Water is a problem, but economic and technological solutions show promise in ameliorating it. But more importantly, Walker and other overpopulationists get the causality backwards. Poverty is the cause and high fertility is the symptom. Poverty traps and failed states which result in high maternal death rates, starvation, pollution, and deforestation are not created by population, but by bad policies. Working to spread economic freedom and political liberty is a lot harder than self-righteously blaming poor people for breeding too much. But it's the only real option.
Imminent doom has been declared again. But don’t worry, neo-Malthusian predictions of overpopulation are wrong. Every so often, the overpopulation meme erupts into public discourse and imminent doom is declared again. A particularly overwrought example of the overpopulation meme and its alleged problems appeared recently in the Wall Street Journal’s MarketWatch in a piece by regular financial columnist Paul B. Farrell. Farrell asserts that overpopulation is “the biggest time-bomb for Obama, America, capitalism, the world.” Bigger than global warming, poverty, or peak oil. Overpopulation will end capitalism and maybe even destroy modern civilization. As evidence, Farrell cites what he calls neo-Malthusian biologist Jared Diamond's 12-factor equation of population doom. It turns out that Farrell is wrong or misleading about the environmental and human effects of all 12 factors he cites. Let’s take them one by one. 1. Overpopulation multiplier: Looking at the most recent United Nations’ population projections, it is likely that world population will peak somewhere between 8 and 9 billion near the middle of this century (current population is about 6.8 billion) and then begin declining back toward 6 billion by 2100. In addition, if lower fertility rates are the goal, promoting economic freedom is the way to achieve it. In 2002, Seth Norton, a business economics professor at Wheaton College in Illinois, published a remarkably interesting study on the inverse relationship between economic freedom and fertility. Norton found that the fertility rate in countries that ranked low on economic freedom averaged 4.27 children per woman while countries with high economic freedom rankings had an average fertility rate of 1.82 children per woman. Crop yields have been increasing at a rate of about 2 percent year for 100 years and now population is growing at 1 percent per year. 2. Population Impact multiplier: Farrell mirrors Diamond's concern that the world's poor want to become rich. This means that they aim to consume more. Can the Earth sustain increased consumption? Yes, economic efficiency is dematerializing the economy and thus will spare more land and other resources for nature. As Jesse Ausubel, director of the human environment program at Rockefeller University, and colleagues have shown, although the average global consumer enjoyed 45 percent more affluence in 2006 than in 1980, each consumed only 22 percent more crops and 13 percent more energy. See below for more information on positive trends in agriculture, water usage, and forest growth. 3. Food: Farrell says we are running out. It is true that far too many people are on the verge of starvation and the recent economic crisis has pushed even more in that direction. But Farrell and Diamond overlook the fact that crop yields have been increasing at a rate of about 2 percent per year for 100 years and now population is growing at 1 percent per year. Agronomist Paul Waggoner argued in his a 1996 article, "How Much Land Can Ten Billion People Spare for Nature?," published in the journal Daedalus, that "if during the next sixty to seventy years the world farmer reaches the average yield of today’s U.S. corn grower, the 10 billion will need only half of today’s cropland while they eat today’s American calories." If Waggoner is right—and all signs are that he is—the future will be populated by fat people who will have plenty of wilderness in which to frolic. 4. Water: There is no doubt that a lot of fresh water is being wasted. However, we know how to solve that problem—create property rights and free markets for water. For example, water use per capita in the United States has been declining for two decades. Farrell and Diamond propagate the stale water wars meme. Transboundary water cooperation rather than conflict is the norm. "The simple explanation is that water is simply too important to fight over," notes Aaron Wolf, the Oregon State University professor who heads up the Program in Water Conflict Management. Wolf observes that history records that the last water war occurred 4500 years ago between Lagash and Umma over irrigation rights in what is now Iraq. Farrell claims that forests are being destroyed at an accelerating rate. He is wrong. Forest regrowth is the actual trend in many places. 5. Farmland: First note that vast increases in agricultural productivity over the past half century spared an area about the size of South America from being plowed up to produce food for the current population. In a 2000 Science article, soil scientist Pierre Crosson and colleagues noted, "studies of the onfarm productivity effects based on 1982 N[ational] R[esource] I[nventory] cropland erosion indicated that if those rates continue for 100 years, crop yields (output per hectare) would be reduced only 2 to 4 percent. These results indicate that the productivity effects of soil erosion are not significant enough to justify increased federal outlays to reduce the erosion, but not all agree." In any case, soil erosion is a problem that is being addressed by modern high-tech no-till agriculture. 6. Forests: Farrell claims that forests are being destroyed at an accelerating rate. He is wrong. Forest regrowth is the actual trend in many places. A 2006 article on forest trends in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences found "Among 50 nations with extensive forests reported in the Food and Agriculture Organization’s comprehensive Global Forest Resources Assessment 2005, no nation where annual per capita gross domestic product exceeded $4,600 had a negative rate of growing stock change." In fact, leaving aside Brazil and Indonesia, globally the forests of the world increased by about 2 percent since 1990. And there is further good news—a quarter to a third of the tropical forests that have been cut down are now regenerating. 7. Toxic chemicals: Farrell writes, "Consider the deadly impact of insecticides, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, plastics ... the list is endless." When one actually considers the impact on synthetic chemicals on people, it turns out that the more man-made chemicals, the higher do human life expectancies rise. Contrary to activist claims, trace amounts of synthetic chemicals are not producing a cancer epidemic. In fact, cancer incidence rates in the U.S. have been falling for nearly a decade. 8. Energy resources, oil, natural gas, and coal: Farrell is just incoherent here. He hints at "peak oil," and supplies may become tight, but that would largely be a result of political factors, not the depletion of reserves. As for coal and natural gas supplies, no one is suggesting their imminent depletion. 9. Solar energy: Farrell does not here mean photovoltaic power, but rather the Earth's "photosynthetic capacity,” that is, the ability of plants to turn sunlight into food, fuel, and other useful products. Apparently, he thinks that humanity is using too much of it. To the extent this is a problem, biotech advances are already addressing it by researching ways to boost crop productivity by transforming plants from less efficient C3 photosynthesizers to the more efficient C4 pathway. The world's poor want to become rich. This means that they aim to consume more. Can the Earth sustain increased consumption? Yes. 10. Ozone layer: Farrell seems unaware of the fact that this problem has already largely been dealt with. To the extent this was a problem, the Montreal Protocol in 1987 that banned the refrigerants that were depleting the ozone layer has fixed it. This month, NASA reported a slightly positive trend of ozone increase of almost 1 percent per decade in the total ozone from the past 14 years. 11. Diversity: Biodiversity trends are notoriously difficult to predict. In 1979, Oxford University biologist Norman Myers suggested in his book The Sinking Ark that 40,000 species per year were going extinct and that 1 million species would be gone by the year 2000. Myers suggested that the world could "lose one-quarter of all species by the year 2000." At a 1979 symposium at Brigham Young University, Thomas Lovejoy, former president of The H. John Heinz III Center for Science, Economics, and the Environment announced that he had made "an estimate of extinctions that will take place between now and the end of the century. Attempting to be conservative wherever possible, I still came up with a reduction of global diversity between one-seventh and one-fifth." Lovejoy drew up the first projections of global extinction rates for the “Global 2000 Report to the President” in 1980. If Lovejoy had been right, between 15 and 20 percent of all species alive in 1980 would be extinct right now. No one believes that extinctions of this magnitude have occurred over the last three decades. What happens to humanity if many species do go extinct? In a 2003 Science article called "Prospects for Biodiversity,” Martin Jenkins, who works for the United Nations Environment Programme-World Conservation Monitoring Center, pointed out that even if the dire projections of extinction rates being made by conservation advocates are correct, they "will not, in themselves, threaten the survival of humans as a species." The Science article notes, "In truth, ecologists and conservationists have struggled to demonstrate the increased material benefits to humans of 'intact' wild systems over largely anthropogenic ones [like farms] … Where increased benefits of natural systems have been shown, they are usually marginal and local." 12. Alien species: Farrell claims, "transferring species to lands where they're not native can have unintended and catastrophic effects." Mostly not. Biologist Mark Davis chalks up most opposition to "alien" species to prejudice and muddy thinking, adding in the current issue of the New Scientist that "you may be surprised to learn that only a few per cent of introduced species are harmful. Most are relatively benign." As I pointed out nine years ago, the preference for native over non-native species is essentially a religious one. It has no warrant in biology. While there certainly are environmental problems, current trends do not portend a looming population apocalypse. Instead, the 21st century will be more likely remembered as the century of ecological restoration.
Some 700 million women alive today were married before they turned 18. More than one in three of them were married before they turned 15, according to new statistics released ahead of the first ever Girl Summit in London.
House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) will shift this week from his years-long focus on cutting federal spending to an anti-poverty proposal that seeks to overhaul the safety net but also leaves in place existing levels of funding.
In the last 15 years, the world has seen the most successful anti-poverty push in history. The number of people living in extreme poverty has been cut in half, from 43% in 1990 to fewer than 20% today. More children are in school than ever before. And the reduction of child deaths from preventable causes has fallen by more than 30%.
To begin with, in capitalist society it is much easier to make money if you already have money, and much more difficult if you are poor. So, for example, a rich person can buy up a number of foreclosed houses and rent them out to desperate tenants at ridiculously high rates. Then, each time rent is paid, the landlord becomes richer and the tenant becomes poorer, and inequalities in wealth grow.
In recent decades, several studies have focused on the impact of refugees on the local economies of hosting countries (Chambers 1986, Whitaker 1999, Alix-Garcia 2007). In Tanzania, an assessment was undertaken of the impact of Rwandan refugees on local agricultural prices between 1993 and 1998 ( Alix-Garcia, 2007). The study found a significant increase in the prices of some agricultural goods (e.g., cooking bananas, beans and milk) and a decrease in the price of aid-delivered goods (e.g., maize). As a result, many Tanzanian farmers who produced a surplus benefited from an increased demand for their agricultural products in local markets. Anecdotal evidence suggested that on average, farmers doubled the size of their cultivated land and their production of bananas and beans during 1993-1996 (Whitaker, 2002). The increase in the size of the local markets also boosted business and trade activities conducted by both hosts and refugees. At the same time, welfare indicators such as electricity, televisions, and refrigerators increased in host population households near refugee camps (Whitaker, 2002).¶ A recent impact evaluation of refugee camps in Daadab, Kenya (Nordic Agency for Development and Ecology, 2010),9 which hosts one of the largest refugee populations in the world, estimates that the total annual direct and indirect benefits of the camp operation for the local host community were around US$ 82 million in 2009, and is projected to reach US$ 100 million in 2010. Some of the funds for the camp operation are allocated to infrastructure investments that benefit the host community. The impact of the Daadab camps on the local host community are widely felt through trading opportunities and reduced food and commodity prices. Furthermore, refugee camps have developed major local markets with considerable purchasing power in relation to pastoral products such as milk and livestock. However, despite these positive indicators, the presence of refugees is also associated with the depletion of firewood and building materials as well as competition for grazing land in the immediate vicinity of the camps. The assessment concludes that impacts on the host community are complex and have both negative and positive aspects. Depending on the situation of the individual household, the positive and negative impacts of the refugee presence will play out differently, however, on balance, the study found that there were more positive than negative impacts on the host area.¶ One of the positive contributions that refugees can make to host countries is skills and knowledge that can be utilized for the benefit of local people. In this regard, the multiple ways in which refugees pursue their livelihoods can make significant contributions to the local economy. For instance, in Amman, Jordan, well-educated Iraqi refugees staff hospitals and universities and contribute know-how to local businesses (Crisp et al, 2009).10 Another important contribution of refugees to local economies is associated with their access to transnational resources provided by other refugees and co-nationals living abroad, including remittances and social networks (Jacobsen, 2002). A study of Somali refugees and remittances explains how cash transfers to refugees have impacts on receiving communities (Horst and Van Hear, 2002). Individual remittances that often go to displaced families and relatives are used to meet basic livelihood needs. Similarly, research on the Somali Diaspora in Canada points out how informal banking systems have facilitated cash transfers to Somali refugees in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Yemen (Hamza, 2006). These resources have contributed not only to the improvement of living conditions at the household level, but also to those in refugee camps, especially in terms of housing, water provision, and telephone services. However, it is important to mention that in general remittances can also enhance inequalities since they are unevenly distributed and poorer households may not have relatives in the Diaspora.11
Accomac - Orbital Sciences Corp.'s Antares rocket took off Sunday from a NASA facility on the Virginia coast, carrying more than 3,500 pounds of supplies and equipment to the International Space Station. The Cygnus space capsule mounted atop the rocket is loaded with food, science experiments and new odor-resistant exercise clothes for the six-person space-station crew, according to the Associated Press. "It's like Christmas in July," said former US astronaut Frank Culbertson, now an Orbital Sciences executive. Bright sunlight and clouds limited visibility from the ground at launch, but skywatchers from North Carolina to New Jersey might have gotten a chance to see the rocket as it climbed through Earth's atmosphere, the AP said. The ship is due to arrive at the space station, which was 260 miles above Australia when the rocket lifted off from NASA's Wallops Island launch facility, on Wednesday. Most of the shipment consists of food for the crew of US, Russian and German astronauts. The new workout clothing is resistant to bacteria and odor, enabling astronauts to work out for two hours a day with fewer clothing changes needed. The cost of the mission is being paid for by NASA under its $1.9 billion contract with the Virginia-based company, entered into when the space shuttle fleet was retired in 2011. The European Space Agency also delivers supplies to the station, but its final ship is scheduled to launch at the end of June. Current plans call for the Cygnus capsule to stay at the space station for about a month before it gets filled with trash and cut loose to burn up in the atmosphere. Saturday was the 5,000th day of continuous human habitation at the space station, the AP said.
The private spaceflight company SpaceX launched six commercial satellites into low-Earth orbit today (July 14) in a mission that was expected to include a key rocket-reusability test. The company's Falcon 9 rocket streaked into space from the pad at Florida's Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 11:15 a.m. EDT (1515 GMT) Monday, carrying six spacecraft for the satellite-communications firm ORBCOMM. The satellites are the first members of the OG2 (short for "ORBCOMM Generation 2") constellation, which should provide a big upgrade over the current OG1 network, company officials said. SpaceX is expected to launch a total of 17 OG2 craft using the Falcon 9. The OG2 satellites, which weigh about 375 lbs. (170 kilograms) each, were built by Sierra Nevada Corp. They're destined for an elliptical orbit that will take them between 382 and 466 miles (615 to 750 kilometers) above Earth's surface. A successful delivery of the OG2 satellites may have been the main objective of Monday's launch, but it wasn't the only one. SpaceX also aimed to bring the Falcon 9's first stage back to Earth in a soft ocean-splashdown, to test out and advance reusable-rocket technology. It was not clear immediately after liftoff how well this test went. Developing fully and rapidly reusable launch vehicles is a key priority of SpaceX's billionaire founder Elon Musk, who has said that this breakthrough could slash the cost of spaceflight by a factor of 100. In doing so, reusable rockets could help open the solar system for manned exploration, perhaps even making a Mars colony economically feasible. SpaceX attempted a similar first-stage return during the last Falcon 9 liftoff in April, which blasted the robotic Dragon capsule toward the International Space Station on a cargo mission for NASA. That test went well; datashowed that the rocket stage did indeed make a controlled landing in the Atlantic Ocean, though rough seas destroyed it before recovery boats could reach the splashdown scene. Monday's launch was originally planned for May 10, but the cancellation of a pre-launch Falcon 9 static-fire test and scheduling constraints pushed the liftoff back by about two months. The launch also comes on the heels of SpaceX receiving certification from the U.S. Air Force of its Falcon 9 rocket after three successful flights, a major step in the company's plan to compete for U.S. military satellite launch contracts.
CAPE CANAVERAL -- Successful rocket launches don't usually end with a "kaboom," but SpaceX's did Monday morning. A Falcon 9 rocket roared from its Cape Canaveral Air Force Station pad at 11:15 a.m. and delivered a half-dozen commercial communications satellites to a spot-on orbit within 15 minutes, completing the mission for Orbcomm Inc. While the rocket's upper stage climbed, the first stage slowed its hypersonic speed, flew a controlled descent to a splashdown zone in the Atlantic Ocean and deployed a set of landing legs. It was then SpaceX's latest attempt to advance development of a reusable booster ended with a bang. "Rocket booster reentry, landing burn & leg deploy were good, but lost hull integrity right after splashdown (aka kaboom)," SpaceX CEO Elon Musk reported on Twitter. Musk said more analysis was needed to determine if it was the splashdown or the "body slam" that followed when the stage tipped over on its side that caused the damage. Boats were expected to try to fish the booster or its remains from the water. A successfully water recovery is likely necessary before SpaceX can try to fly a rocket back to a landing site at the Cape, something Musk had hoped might be possible this year. The previous Falcon 9 flight in April achieved a soft ocean landing – the first ever attempted by a liquid-fueled booster – but the stage broke up in stormy seas that kept recovery crews at bay for two days. SpaceX believes reusing rocket boosters, which are normally discarded after one use, will dramatically lower launch costs and revolutionize the launch industry. While the recovery experiment did not go as well as hoped Monday, Musk was able to enjoy a celebratory glass of champagne with Orbcomm CEO Marc Eisenberg at SpaceX's Cape Canaveral launch control center. The bubbly may have been waiting on ice for months, since the mission endured delay after delay since April due to problems with the Eastern Range, the rocket, satellites and weather. Two countdowns scrubbed last month. Now Orbcomm, a publicly traded provider of machine-to-machine communications, finally has its first six of 17 second-generation satellites in orbit about 500 miles up. "It feels like I just gave birth to sextuplets," Eisenberg said after the launch. "We've been at this for so long. We always knew it would happen the right way, it was just a question of when. We're pretty excited to get it launched." The six small satellites, each 380 pounds, filled a hole in New Jersey-based Orbcomm's aging constellation of 25 first-generation satellites flying in four orbital planes. Each new spacecraft can provide more capacity than the entire legacy network. "The whole network is going to get pretty drastically better," said Eisenberg. "We're expecting almost immediate financial impact when we put these in service in the next 30 to 60 days." The satellites and ground sensors help track the location of trucks and ships moving around the globe, ensure refrigerated rail cars are keeping contents cool and monitor the health of heavy construction equipment. The remaining 11 satellites in the roughly $200 million Orbcomm Generation 2 constellation will launch on another Falcon 9, possibly before the end of the year. The launch was the 10th by a Falcon 9 since it began flying in 2010, and the fifth by the upgraded version that debuted last fall. SpaceX hopes to launch another commercial communications satellite from the Cape within a few weeks. Before that, United Launch Alliance is targeting launches of military satellites on July 23 and July 31.
Keith's note: Sigh, yet another NAS SSB meeting on "public and stakeholder Opinions" that is closed to the "public" and "stakeholders" i.e. the taxpayers who paid for it. As previously noted on NASA Watch, these expensive ($3.6 million) panels, composed of the usual suspects plus a few newbies, take years to churn out an end product. The product is watered down and is biased toward the pre-ordained opinions of Congress, the committee, and the select consultants that the SSB consults. No description is ever presented to the public as to how input is solicited, processed, or collated - nor does the public have any recourse whereby they can find out how the committee conducted itself.
WASHINGTON — Call it opportunity. Call it cold reality. The nation's space program is increasingly reliant on private partners to send astronauts into space as its slice of the federal budget diminishes.
When no second terrorist attack occurred in 2001, experts adjusted their time horizons. "If we get through the summer without some sort of attack, we'll be pretty fortunate," said George Vinson, a security adviser to then-California Gov. Gray Davis, in June 2002. In February 2003, Tom Ridge, the nation's first secretary of homeland defense, publicly estimated an 80 percent likelihood that terrorists would attack the United States within the next few days. In August 2003, the World Markets Research Center said it was "highly likely" that terrorists would attack the United States within the next 12 months. In June 2006, unnamed U.S. officials told CBS News they'd be surprised if the United States weren't hit by a terrorist attack by the end of that year. In December 2008, the Commission on the Prevention of WMD Proliferation and Terrorism said it was "more likely than not" that by the end of 2013, terrorists would attack somewhere in the world using a chemical, biological, or nuclear weapon. In a Feb. 4 interview with Politico, former Vice President Dick Cheney said there was "a high probability of such an attempt." He didn't say when. It didn't happen—or, rather, it hasn't happened yet. Islamist terrorists struck Bali, Madrid, London, Mumbai, and many places in and around the Mideast, but they haven't struck the United States. Why not? The question is impossible to answer with certainty. But given that the "war on terrorism" was (for good or ill) the defining pursuit of George W. Bush's presidency, anyone seeking to understand the previous eight years of American political history must ask it. More urgently, our new president, Barack Obama, is surely pondering this question as he assesses the present risk of a terrorist attack on the United States and how best to address it. I spent the Obama transition asking various terrorism experts why the dire predictions of a 9/11 sequel proved untrue and reviewing the literature on this question. The answers boiled down to eight prevailing theories whose implications range from fairly reassuring to deeply worrying. I. The Terrorists-Are-Dumb Theory The 9/11 attacks were heralded as the harbinger of a new era of foreign-based terrorism in the United States. What if they were really a fluke?
So is it time to hit the giant red panic button? Not exactly. Counterterrorism experts tell The Week that the terrorist organization is crippled and is unlikely to launch a wide-scale attack inside the United States, focusing instead on diverse targets abroad. "Al Qaeda central no longer exists as an effective organization," says Fawaz Gerges, a professor at the London School of Economics and Political Science, who has done extensive field research on al Qaeda. "Most of its skilled leaders and lieutenants have been either killed or captured. It is no longer capable of carrying out spectacular operations along the 9/11 lines." In the last ten years, al Qaeda has come to resemble a wounded hydra-headed snake. Steven Weber, a political science professor at the University of California at Berkeley, says, "Everybody agrees that the United States has done a pretty good job of chopping off the heads of the organization." For example, the guy that the National Journal calls "the next bin Laden," Abu Musab al-Suri, "hasn't been heard from in years [and] it's hard to lead a top terrorist organization if you're dead or in prison," says Aki Peritz, a senior policy adviser for Third Way and a former CIA counterterrorism analyst. Today, the new al Qaeda is made up of smaller, splintered "heads" that have popped up across the globe. There are at least five distinct branches that have sworn allegiance, or "bayat," to al Qaeda, located in Iraq, Yemen, Somalia, North Africa, and Syria. There are also jihadist organizations that cooperate with al Qaeda, but haven't actually sworn allegiance to the terrorist group. And finally, there are "sympathizers" like the Fort Hood shooter, who are inspired by al Qaeda, but have no tangible connection with the group. Prior to 9/11, al Qaeda was so organized that members had vacation days. That's not the case anymore. On the surface, the proliferation of these distinct groups certainly sounds scary. Rep. Rogers makes the case that the new factions make al Qaeda's capabilities "more dangerous and more numerous" to the U.S. homeland. But counterterrorism experts disagree. "Since al Qaeda has become more decentralized, the vast majority of attacks are happening against what you'd call the 'near-enemy,' so for example, attacks by al Shabab are focused almost entirely on inside of Somalia," says Seth Jones, an associate director for the RAND Corporation. "They're not more dangerous, if what concerns you most is attacks on the homeland." Director of National Intelligence James Clapper concurs. "Senior personnel losses in 2012, amplifying losses and setbacks since 2008, have degraded core al Qaeda to a point that the group is probably unable to carry out complex, large-scale attacks in the West," he wrote in a March 2013 threat assessment.
It should be noted: The crisis is total fiction. It’s a dress rehearsal for an actual FMD attack, bankrolled by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). More than 200 staffers from dozens of government agencies have come together to stage this elaborate exercise. In the past, drills have included the FBI, DHS and the USDA. Foot-and-mouth disease is the cattle rancher’s bogeyman, a grim specter that hasn’t emerged since 1929 in the mainland U.S. It is devastating, its levels of contagion staggering. “Let me compare it to a common cold,” says Kansas Animal Health Commissioner Bill Brown. “To catch a cold, you need thousands of virus particles to be present; with FMD, you need one or two.” When FMD broke out in the United Kingdom in 2001, the cause was presumed to be accidental. Still, the incident stirred up some dark fears. Happening almost concurrently with 9/11, a time when the world was braced for new modes of attack, it seemed pretty obvious — FMD would make a killer weapon. In 2002, the USDA staged a drill in D.C. called “Crimson Sky.” In this grisly simulation, FMD was intentionally released by terrorists, leading National Guardsmen to slaughter tens of thousands of livestock at gunpoint (no cattle were actually harmed). The term agroterrorism emerged around this time, though it didn’t make it into the Oxford New American Dictionary until 2010: “Terrorist acts intended to disrupt or damage a country’s agriculture, especially the use of a biological agent against crops or livestock.” As a concept, it’s largely theoretical — only a few examples exist from the last 50 years. In 1970, 63 cows were poisoned at a Black Muslim farm in Alabama; the Ku Klux Klan was widely suspected. Palestinian sympathizers injected mercury into a handful of Jaffa oranges in 1978 to disrupt international trade with Israel. And in 1989, a rebel farmer group called the Breeders claimed responsibility for releasing crop-eating medflies in California, as retaliation for state-mandated pesticide spraying. These examples may be small in scale, but they were highly effective: The Muslim farmers abandoned their farm, Israel suffered huge economic losses and California reversed its pesticide-spraying policy. As an agent of fear, of economic harm and even of political leverage, agroterrorism has proven results.
Overall, acquiring these agents, whether through purchase, theft, or manufacturing via a natural source, has inherent risk and requires both technical knowledge and connections. Obtaining an agent is not enough, but rather the non-state actor must have the medical facilities and laboratory to house and work on the pathogen. Even if one has access to their own facility and has extensively trained technicians or pathologists, the access to these agents has reportedly become increasingly tightened, making it far more difficult for individuals or groups to acquire them. Nordmann pointed to the recommendations made by the 2008 Commission on the Prevention of Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferation and Terrorism to increase biosecurity, but the reality is that these measures could take time to be enacted (Nordmann, 2010). Nonetheless, there is a substantial push to make biosecurity measures more secure and universal. Although this initial roadblock is currently most likely one of the easiest to overcome, as time progresses and the concern for bioterrorism grows, restrictions will also tighten on legally purchasing these organisms and on access to facilities that house them. The only alternatives will increasingly be to acquire them naturally, which is extremely technically intensive and demanding.
Here's the good news: Many security experts—the kind of people who throw around terms like "creative foresight" and "horizon-scanning methodologies"—say that formal al Qaeda–esque groups as we know them are not likely to last very long into the future.
The reason we can boldly proclaim that terrorism does not pose an existential threat to the United States has far more to do with the nature of terrorism — what terrorism is — than it does with the intent and capability of the actors who employ terrorism.
If we have learned anything from the experience since 9/11, it's that the public and its leaders chronically overestimate the danger posed by Islamic militants. This latest episode fits that pattern. "In the face of rogue jihadists living in the West and urged to attack their homeland, the threat 'is the new normal,' one U.S. government official explained," according to The Daily Beast. "There are thousands more jihadists living in the West than security forces to keep an eye on them. And with the war in Syria raging, there is the potential for that to grow as fighters return from the front lines, potentially radicalized." Former Connecticut Sen. Joseph Lieberman echoes that concern, warning in The Wall Street Journal that "the enemy is stronger today in more places than it was on 9/11 and is gaining more ground than ever." He fears that "the number and frequency of attacks like those in France will increase." But he and others have a history of sounding alarms that are false or greatly overstated. In 2011, Lieberman expected that the killing of Osama bin Laden would prompt someone to "attempt an attack within the United States in the coming days or weeks." It didn't happen. In 2003, notes Ohio State University political scientist John Mueller, U.S. intelligence officials expected a flurry of attacks here after the Iraq invasion. Wrong again. Last summer, Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel called the Islamic State "an imminent threat." Nothing came of it. The biggest terrorist attack on American soil since 9/11 is the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing—which the soothsayers missed. Two phenomena are at work. One is our habitual human tendency to worry too much about dramatic, unusual dangers, like terrorism and Ebola, and too little about commonplace ones, like car wrecks and falls, that are far more likely to kill us. When we hear about terrorists shooting innocents, we get cold chills wondering whether we'll be next. When we hear that someone died of a stroke, we yawn. The other factor is a giant public-private network that has a stake in stoking these fears. The bureaucratic reality is that it's safer to issue warnings about dozens of dangers that never pan out than to downplay a single one that later materializes. Government officials need a sense of urgent peril to justify their budgets and their powers. Private contractors have reason to inflate the problems they get paid to address. The resulting system, says Mueller, amounts to "a self-licking ice cream cone." By now, the worry about terrorism is ingrained in us. In the wake of the Paris attacks, a Pew poll found, nearly two out of three Americans are "somewhat" or "very" worried that a terrorist attack will soon happen here. But public fear has been that high for years. When an attack happens, we expect more attacks—and when no attack happens, we expect more attacks. A plurality of citizens consistently worry that the government is doing too little to combat terrorism. What is easy to forget is that people in general and Americans in particular enjoy exceptional levels of safety. There was a true threat to our national existence during the Cold War, when nuclear incineration was perpetually half an hour away. There was far more terrorism on U.S. soil in the 1970s, when leftist radicals carried out hundreds of bombings, and even in the 1990s. The chance that extremist violence will touch any of us directly was minuscule before the latest attacks, and it still is. There simply aren't that many people with the will, resources and acumen to engage in serious terrorist operations.
The goal of any terrorist is not only to do harm, but to get attention. “A spectacular attack using cyberterrorism would be very complicated. It would be a lot easier to simply fill a truck with explosives and drive it into a vulnerable spot, or produce nerve gas and release it on the subway,” Diesen points out. The Web is important for terrorists, but for entirely different reasons. Terrorists use the Web "for propaganda and recruitment and to assume responsibility for their actions.” says Diesen's colleague Torgeir Broen, who is also a researcher at FFI, FFI has started to develop a study of the use of computers in warfare. The researchers say that there is a big difference between opportunistic crime and targeted terror and warfare. Broen points out that “online crime for financial gain is tremendously widespread. But these criminals do not have to take over one particular machine. That is much more difficult.” Layer upon layer upon layer Although it is possible to access the user area of a slightly sloppy operator who has used the name of his cat or the birthday of his wife as his password, you have to bypass quite a few security layers to even begin to guess the password. “If you want to take control of an industrial control system, such as a nuclear power plant, you have to enter the computer system of the energy company,” Diesen explains. “So you have to get into a specific network. Then you have to get into a specific computer on the network, and then into a specific software component.” “You have to know these systems well. For example, you have to know which version of the applications they use and how they are used. The difficulties quickly pile up,” he says. Intelligence All this means that if military hackers from another country want to be able to do some damage, they need information. A lot of information. As Broen says, “these operations are so dependent on intelligence that the link between the people engaged in hacking operations and the intelligence service is very close. It has to be.” Diesen admits that it is hard to get people to understand this. “We are struggling with perceptions created by the entertainment industry. These things seem far easier than they are in reality,” he says. Hacker movies are good entertainment, but not more than that, he adds.Attacks on Iran's nuclear centrifuges Diesen distinguishes between open and closed networks. Closed networks are not connected to the Internet. This is the case for military networks and industrial control networks. He also explains that there is a tendency for more and more networks to be connected to the Internet to be fully functional. But “closed systems increasingly use the same software as open networks," Broen says. "Security mechanisms in commercial software are often better than those found in specialized software, in part because they are exposed to a lot of attacks.”
In the Islamic State of Iraq and Greater Syria’s (ISIS) drive to establish what it calls a new caliphate, the group has gathered between 20,000 and 31,500 fighters, partly thanks to its recruitment campaign over social media networks like Facebook, Twitter and YouTube. Widely disseminated video footage of executed American and British citizens have become ISIS’s tools for terror; the Internet is ISIS’s vehicle. Today, ISIS’s adroit use of modern technology is raising a new specter: cyberterrorism. Several prominent national security experts and cyber analysts warned this week that ISIS could someday threaten the United States, elevating fears about the West’s vulnerability to a cyberattack. “ISIS has already had success in utilizing technology, using the web for recruiting, distribution of terrorist information and scare tactics,” David De Walt, the chief executive of tech security company FireEye told the Financial Times this week. Now, De Walt said, “[w]e’ve begun to see signs that rebel terrorist organizations are attempting to gain access in cyber weaponry.” And on Tuesday, National Security Agency Director Michael Rogers warned that the U.S. needs to bolster its defenses against digital attacks from terrorist groups like ISIS. “It’s something I’m watching,” Rogers said of ISIS’s aggressive use of Internet technology at a cybersecurity conference in Washington, D.C. “We need to assume that there will be a cyber dimension increasingly in almost any scenario that we’re dealing with. Counterterrorism is no different.” But do we really need to fear a cyber attack from ISIS? As it turns out, probably not: ISIS’s social media savvy doesn’t necessarily translate into a real cybersecurity threat against the United States, and much of the talk about the group’s growing cyber-prowess overstates the point, experts told TIME. “I don’t think anyone has any proof that there’s an imminent attack or that ISIS has acquired the manpower or the resources to launch an attack on the infrastructure of the United States,” said Craig Guiliano, senior threat specialist at security firm TSC Advantage and a former counterterrorism officer with the Department of Defense. “It could be a potential threat in the future, but we’re not there yet.” ISIS, a group with little technological infrastructure, doesn’t have many resources to wage a cyberwar against the United States. Compared to larger, state-sponsored hacking operations, ISIS is miles behind. Chinese hackers, for instance, who have been accused of attacking U.S. businesses and government contractors, are reported to have wide-ranging support from Chinese authorities, with many of the hackers hailing directly from the Chinese army. A few ISIS-related figures have been connected with cyberattacks or cybercrime. Abu Hussain Al Britani, a British hacker who has since moved to Syria and begun recruiting for ISIS, was jailed in 2012 for hacking into former Prime Minister Tony Blair’s Gmail account. One of the more prominent tech-savvy ISIS supporters, Al Britani maintains a Twitter account that calls for new ISIS recruits. And a group called “Lizard Squad” that has claimed responsibility for high-profile cyberattacks that have brought down the websites of the Vatican, Sony and others has tenuously been linked to ISIS on the basis of tweets like this one: But ISIS doesn’t appear to have the manpower to launch sophisticated attacks against the United States. “You need some resources. You need access to certain kinds of technology. You need to have hardcore programmers,” Jim Lewis of the Center for Strategic and International Studies said. “ISIS doesn’t have those capabilities.” Unlike China’s state-sponsored hackers, who have a strong interest in attacking U.S. businesses to hawk trade secrets and intellectual property, ISIS is more concerned with taking real-world territory and controlling it. ISIS’ first priority is establishing control over the disparate desert regions from the outskirts of Aleppo in Syria to Falluja in Iraq and creating an Islamic caliphate—not an expensive and often intangible cyberwar against American websites. “ISIS wants to conquer the Middle East, not hack websites in Omaha,” said Lewis. That’s not to say that ISIS is incapable of launching an attack in the future. ISIS is believed to be well-funded, likely capable of purchasing simple malware on the black market and using it against the West. But the kinds of attacks ISIS would be able to carry out would likely be more of an annoyance than a debilitating strike on the United States’ infrastructure, the kind of attack that national security experts really worry about.
While governments and the media repeat-edly distribute information about cyber-threats, real cyber-attacks resulting in deaths and injuries remain largely the stuff of Holly-wood movies or conspiracy theory. In fact, menacing scenarios of major disruptive occur-rences in the cyber-domain, triggered by mali-cious actors, have remained just that– scenarios. Nonetheless, for the US government (and to a lesser degree other governments around the world), the decision has been far more straightforward: it considers the threat to national security to be real, has extensively studied various aspects of cyber-threats, and spends considerable sums on a variety of coun-termeasures (Abele-Wigert & Dunn, 2006). This observation raises interesting questions from a security studies perspective: Why and how is a threat that has little or no relation to real-world occurrences included on the secu-rity political agenda? Are there specific characteristics that make it particularly likely to be there? Due to its vague nature, cyber-terrorism is a playfield for very different and diverse commu-nities, concerned with topics such as freedom of speech and Internet censorship (Gladman, 1998; Weimann, 2004a); cyber crime in con-nection with terrorism (Sofaer & Goodman, 2000); or information warfare and sub-state groups (Devost, Houghton, & Pollard, 1997; Rathmell, Overill, Valeri, & Gearson, 1997). This article will focus on cyber-threats and cyber-terror broadly framed as a national secu-rity issue. Previous research on the topic has generally been highly specific and policy-ori-ented (Alberts & Papp, 1997; Arquilla & Ronfeldt, 1996) and has often uncritically adopted arguments on the nature and scale of cyber-terrorism from official statements or pieces of media coverage.2 This is epitomized in the tendency of many authors to hype the is-sue with rhetorical dramatization and alarmist warnings (cf. Arquilla, 1998; Schwartau, 1994). On the other hand, the considerable hype has brought forth a counter-movement of more cautious voices that are deliberately more spe-cific in their estimates of the threat (cf. Lewis, 2002; Wilson, 2003). The key question on which these two groups differ is whether or to what degree there is a credible or likely connec-tion between terrorism and cyber-terrorism be-yond the suspected vulnerability of critical infrastructures (cf. Nicander & Ranstorp, 2004, p. 15) and consequently, at what point in future time such an attack might occur. While it is undisputed in both communities that cyber-at-tacks and cyber-incidents cause major incon-veniences and have cost billions of US dollars in lost intellectual property, maintenance and repair, lost revenue, and increased security in the last couple of years (Cashell, Jackson, Jickling, & Webel, 2004), these two groups dif-fer considerably in their assessment of the fu-ture point in time at which such an attack might occur, and some even doubt whether there truly is a national security threat linked to the Internet and the information infrastructure. The main reason for this controversy is that cyber-threats have not materialized as a na-tional security threat, even granted that there have been some few incidents with at least some potential for grave consequences. Inter-estingly enough, both hypers and de-hypers tend to agree on this point. But while the first group assumes that vicious attacks that wreak havoc and paralyze whole nations are immi-nent, more cautious researchers often point to the practical difficulties of a serious cyber-attack (Ingles-le Nobel, 1999), question the as-sumption of critical infrastructure vulnerabilities (Lewis, 2002; Smith, 1998, 2000), or point to unclear benefits of cyber-attacks for terrorist groups (Barak, 2004). Despite this caution, however, even the second group contends that one “cannot afford to shrug off the threat” (Denning, 2001a) due to unclear and rapid fu-ture technological development as well as dy-namic change of the capabilities of terrorism groups themselves (Technical Analysis Group, 2003). To summarize the debate in a nutshell: due to too many uncertainties concerning the scope of the threat, experts are unable to con-clude whether cyber-terror is fact or fiction, or, since they are unwilling to dismiss the threat completely, how long it is likely to remain fic-tion.
The specter of a large-scale, destructive attack on the U.S. power grid is at the center of much strategic thinking about cybersecurity. For years, Americans have been warned by a bevy of would-be Cassandras in Congress, the administration and the press that hackers are poised to shut it down. But in fact, the half-dozen security experts interviewed for this article agreed it’s virtually impossible for an online-only attack to cause a widespread or prolonged outage of the North American power grid. Even laying the groundwork for such a cyber operation could qualify as an act of war against the U.S. — a line that few nation-state-backed hacker crews would wish to cross. None denied that determined hackers could penetrate the networks of bulk power providers. But there’s a huge gap between that and causing a civilization-ending sustained outage of the grid. Electrical-grid hacking scenarios mostly overlook the engineering expertise necessary to intentionally cause harm to the grid, say experts knowledgeable about the power generators and high voltage transmission entities that constitute the backbone of the grid — what’s called the bulk power system. There’s also the enormity of the grid and diversity of its equipment to consider. “The grid is designed to lose utilities all the time,” said Patrick Miller, founder and director of the Energy Sector Security Consortium. “I’m not trying to trivialize the situation, but you’re not really able to cause this nationwide cascading failure for any extended duration of time,” he added. “It’s just not possible.”
With ISIS running amok over such a large swathe of territory, it’s no surprise that these kinds of fears are growing. But it is important to be realistic about the threat. It remains unlikely that the group will be able to acquire and effectively use chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons.
Emily Chorley, Proliferation Editor for IHS Jane's, admits that "technically there's a risk of any state or group" getting their hands on chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear weapons. News "But in this case, as in most, I'd say the risk is relatively low," she told Channel 4 News. "There are no chemical, biological or nuclear weapons left in Iraq, and all of the chemical weapons declared by the Assad regime have been removed from the country." "Iran certainly wouldn't share its nuclear technology with Isis and its facilities are fairly well-secured," she adds "There is always the possibility that Isis might try to get their hands on 'orphan sources' of radiological material - not under proper regulatory control - for use in a 'dirty bomb', but that would require a lot of effort and risk of apprehension for limited impact. "This type of weapon would also be difficult to smuggle into Western countries." So what analysis backs up Mrs May's claim? Nothing was offered in her speech, and the Home Office told Channel 4 News intelligence "is not something we would provide or comment on", adding that her speech to the Conservative party conference was not something "that involved the Home Office". So in a strange echo of another Iraq war, we're left with claims that WMDs could be developed by a malicious group within reach of the UK, but without sufficient detail to back up the claims. If such evidence does exist,   then hopefully the home secretary has it, and surely it's worth us having it too.
Unlike conventional explosives, chemical munitions are so specialized that it’s hard to repurpose them. ISIS would be better off testing the remaining precursor chemicals at Al Muthanna to create its own chemical weapons from scratch. Fortunately, the Iraq Study Group reported in 2004 that it had found no working production equipment on site.
You could multiply such statements many times over. There’s only one problem with the rising crescendo of alarm about lone wolves: most of it simply isn’t true. There’s nothing new about the “threat” and the concept is notoriously unreliable, as well as selectively used. (These days, “lone wolf” has largely become a stand-in for “Islamic terrorist,” though the category itself is not bound to any specific ideological type.) Worst of all, its recent highlighting paves the way for the heightening of abusive and counterproductive police and national security practices, including the infiltration of minority and activist communities and elaborate sting operations that ensnare the vulnerable. In addition, the categorization of such solitary individuals as terrorists supposedly driven by ideology — left or right, secular or religious — often obscures multiple other factors that may actually cause them to engage in violence.
“Lone wolf” terrorism is often cited as the biggest terrorist threat today. The problem with this label is none of the assailants act alone. They all belong to virtual wolf packs. Law enforcement authorities in Boston, for example, described Usaamah Abdullah Rahim’s scheme to behead random police officers as the plot of a lone wolf. Police also applied the term to other recent terrorist assaults, among them the brutal attack on Charlie Hebdo magazine in Paris that left 12 dead and the Boston Marathon bombing. In all these incidents, the assailants used traditional terror tactics, such as targeting civilians, but appeared to be acting independently of any organization. The “lone wolf” metaphor is based on the image of a wolf alone in the wild. But this is incorrect, as my studies on terrorists reveal. Wolves never hunt alone — in nature or in terrorism. In fact, wolves are among the most social of carnivores; they live and hunt in packs. Though the whole group is not always seen, their attacks rely on a well-coordinated circling and cornering of the victim. Lone-wolf terrorists are very similar. They have their pack — but it’s a virtual one. The solo terrorists are often recruited, radicalized, trained and directed by others online. The current wave of lone-wolf attacks has been propelled by websites and online platforms that provide limitless opportunities for individuals to explore and locate their virtual pack. Gunmen gesture as they return to their car after the attack outside the offices of French satirical weekly newspaper Charlie Hebdo Gunmen gesture as they return to their car after the attack on the offices of French satirical weekly newspaper Charlie Hebdo (seen at rear), in this still image from amateur video shot in Paris, January 7, 2015. REUTERS/Reuters TV An aspiring terrorist can use the Internet to find everything from instructions on how to build a bomb to diagrams of civic buildings that could be potential targets. Websites, Facebook pages, YouTube videos and Twitter postings all provide venues for cultivating extremism that was once possible only through clandestine face-to-face meetings. In the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing, for example, the lone-wolf killers used an explosive device they had learned to make on the Internet. And that is partly how they were radicalized as well. Dzhokhar and Tamerlan Tsarnaev, according to FBI interrogators, subscribed to extremist Islamic beliefs developed through online material and messages. Tamerlan, the older brother, downloaded a significant amount of jihadist material, including a book about “disbelievers” with a foreword by the radical cleric Anwar al Awlaki. He also downloaded the first issue of al Qaeda’s online magazine Inspire, which contained detailed instructions for making a bomb from a pressure cooker. Dzhokhar appears to have been largely influenced by his older brother Tamerlan, but he was also radicalized through online content. An attempted May 3 assault in Garland, Texas, where Elton Simpson and Nadir Soofi attacked a Mohammad art contest, was also labeled a lone-wolf attack. But Simpson and Soofi had their own virtual pack and they left clear footprint across various online platforms. Simpson, a convert to Islam with a long history of extremism, regularly traded calls for violence on Twitter with Islamic State fighters and supporters. His Twitter virtual pack included Junaid Hussain, known as Abu Hussain al Britani, a British fighter with Islamic State in Syria, and Mohamed Abdullahi Hassan, a Somali-American now in Somalia who uses the name Mujahid Miski and frequently promotes Islamic State. Both recruiters were actively promoting terrorism online. Hassan even suggested the cartoon contest as a possible target. On April 23, 10 days before the Texas attack, Hassan praised the January attack on the Charlie Hebdo offices in Paris and called on jihadists in the United States to follow that example. “The brothers from the Charlie Hebdo attack did their part,” Hassan wrote in one post. “It’s time for brothers in the #US to do their part.” Simpson’s last tweet, sent just minutes before the assault began, included the phrases “may Allah accept us as mujahideen” and “#TexasAttack.” An online statement from Islamic State soon after referred to the gunmen as “two soldiers from the soldiers of the caliphate.” Tracking lone-wolf terrorists can be a nightmare for police and intelligence counterterrorism units. For they are extremely difficult to find, identify and arrest. Compared to group or network terrorism, lone wolves can often avoid detection before and even after their attacks because most do not publicly reveal their real inclinations or plans. Yet they are traceable because they share common characteristics, despite their varied backgrounds. First, they are not really alone: They are connected online, where they often engage in robust conversations. Across a wide variety of sites and platforms, they can reveal a strong commitment to or identification with extremist movements. In addition, their actions do not take place in a vacuum. Their virtual packs can be monitored and studied. Thorough outreach by law enforcement into radical, extremist and other terrorist communities is another key to find early warnings.
"We find no evidence that lone wolf terrorism is increasing," said Mark Hamm, criminology professor and terrorism expert. Before the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, Hamm counts 38 cases of lone wolf terrorism -- many cases involving multiple attacks, and in the past 13 years, he isolated 45 cases, most of which were single attacks. No decade was deadlier than the 1990s -- mostly because of the 1996 Olympics bombing, anti-abortion bombers, the return of the Unabomber and mass shooter Colin Ferguson, Hamm said. The targets, weapons and motives have changed in recent years, Hamm found. Before 9/11, these terrorists used bombs, but now high-velocity firearms are the weapon of choice, he said. The change might be a result of legislation enacted after the Oklahoma City bombing limiting the public's access to bomb-making ingredients. Police and military personnel are now the preferred targets of modern lone wolf terrorists, Hamm said. Look at the Fort Hood and Los Angeles International Airport shootings or police assassin Richard Poplawski or Abdulhakim Muhammad (aka Carlos Bledsoe), who committed a drive-by shooting at an Army recruiting center. Many of these attacks, too, are at close-range -- "close, personal, high velocity" is how Hamm described Christopher Dorner's attacks against police in California last year. Many pre-9/11 lone wolf terrorists never saw their victims or met them, Hamm said. For example, Mark Essex killed five police officers and wounded five more in a 1973 shooting in New Orleans. In this attack, he stood on the roof of a hotel and shot at police. Poplawski, however, was so close to his victims, he said he could read their name badges. For his research, Hamm defines a lone wolf terrorist by four characteristics: a person who perpetrates political violence, does not belong to (but often identifies with) an organized group such as al-Qaeda, acts alone (as opposed to the pair of Boston Marathon bombers), and does not commit violence out of grief or the pursuit of profit, vengeance or fame. Statistically, most lone wolf terrorists are white, unemployed single males with a criminal record, Hamm said. Because these terrorists are getting younger in the post-9/11 era, they have grown up in a, media-driven paramilitary or "Rambo" culture; however, less than a third of them have actual military experience and none fought in Afghanistan or Iraq, Hamm said. The research is sponsored by the U.S. Department of Justice, and Hamm's database will be turned over to the government for public use. Assisted by what Hamm jokingly describes as his "Sherlock Homies," (a play on the fictional investigator's name), he and his team started by examining 98 cases between 1940 and 2013 and analyzed the data for 21 variables, producing 2,058 searchable characteristics. It is the largest database ever created on lone wolf terrorism. While the quantitative review is complete, Hamm continues to work on the qualitative aspect, conducting prison interviews where possible. This phase of his research will fill the holes that statistics can't tell, he said. For instance, in the late 1960s, relatively few people were killed by lone wolf terrorists -- among them the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert Kennedy. We have no statistic to measure the political loss of those two men," Hamm said. He describes King as "the conscience of the civil rights movement," and Hamm met Kennedy on the Indiana State campus in 1968, several weeks before he was assassinated. Today, even the Islamic State (formerly, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria or ISIS) has links to lone wolf terrorism and prisoner radicalization. "You don't come out of your mother's womb a terrorist," Hamm said. ISIS is the "9th, 10th, 11th, 12th-order effect of prison radicalization" and traces its roots to the former Jordanian prisoner Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who was killed by the U.S. in 2006, Hamm said. His followers formed the group after his death. A big concern for the U.S. State Department and the F.B.I. is Americans who identify with radicals such as ISIS. "The influence of the Internet is remarkable," Hamm said. While the practice of beheading someone is an ancient punishment in the Middle East, YouTube is new technology. Broadcasting the brutal event fulfills the definition of terrorism: "Kill one, frighten 10, 000," he said. "This is the thing about terrorism -- it affects an entire community. That's why we're so concerned about it," Hamm said.
Despite a number of claims, there is no credible evidence that any terrorist group has yet succeeded in obtaining a nuclear bomb or the materials needed to make one. The nuclear intent and capability of terrorist groups such as Al Qaeda has been “fundamentally exaggerated.” Almost all of the stolen HEU and plutonium that has been seized over the years had not been missed before it was seized. The likelihood that a terrorist group will come up with an atomic bomb seems to be vanishingly small;” and Policymakers are guilty of an “atomic obsession” that has led to “substantively counterproductive” policies premised on “worst case fantasies”. Anxieties about terrorists obtaining nuclear weapons are essentially baseless: a host of practical and organizational difficulties make their likelihood of success almost vanishingly small”[xxxi]. John Mueller, a scholar of international relations at the Ohio State University, is a prominent nuclear skeptic. He makes three claims: (1) the nuclear intent and capability of terrorist groups such as Al Qaeda has been “fundamentally exaggerated;” (2) “the likelihood a terrorist group will come up with an atomic bomb seems to be vanishingly small;” and (3) policymakers are guilty of an “atomic obsession” that has led to “substantively counterproductive” policies premised on “worst case fantasies.”[xxxii] In his book, “Atomic Obsession: Nuclear Alarmism from Hiroshima to Al-Qaeda” he argues that, “anxieties about terrorists obtaining nuclear weapons are essentially baseless”.[xxxiii] Decades after Cheney’s forecast, how many nuclear weapons from the former Soviet arsenal have proliferated to rogue states or terrorists? Not the 250 Cheney predicted. Not 25. Miracle of miracles, not a single nuclear weapon has been discovered outside the control of Russia’s nuclear custodians[xxxiv]. After 9/11, it would seem prudent for nuclear power plants to be prepared for an attack by a large, well-armed terrorist group. But the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, in revising its security rules, decided not to require that plants be able to defend themselves against groups carrying sophisticated weapons. According to a study by the Government Accountability Office, the NRC appeared to have based its revised rules “on what the industry considered reasonable and feasible to defend against rather than on an assessment of the terrorist threat itself”. The Federation of American Scientists have said that if nuclear power use is to expand significantly, nuclear facilities will have to be made extremely safe from attacks that could release massive quantities of radioactivity into the community. New reactor designs have features of passive safety, which may help. In the United States, the NRC carries out “Force on Force” (FOF) exercises at all Nuclear Power Plant (NPP) sites at least once every three year[xxxv]. Conventional wisdom suggests that domestic regulations, UN Security Council resolutions, G-8, NSS initiatives , IAEA look out and other voluntary efforts will prevent nuclear terrorism.
Obtaining fissile weapons grade materials is no easy matter for terrorists, chiefly for the following reasons. Enriching uranium or producing the necessary quantity of plutonium requires scientific and technological facilities that no terrorist organisation has. Acquiring the necessary quantities of fissile weapons-grade materials on the black market would require the relevant supply, which is not currently there (the IAEA receives about 150-200 reports from Member States each year of fissile materials that are lost, stolen or otherwise out of their control, but, first, most incidents are unrelated to weapons-grade uranium or plutonium and, secondly, in all reported incidents the fissile materials are returned under proper control). Should terrorists nevertheless succeed in obtaining the requisite quantity of weapons-grade uranium or plutonium, as a study commissioned in 1977 by US Congress showed, a small group of people who had never had any access to classified information could develop and build a primitive nuclear explosive device [4]. To do so, according to estimates at that time, they would need up to US$ 1 million, a medium-size workshop, at least one specialist who is conversant with the relevant literature, and an engineer. Today, some solutions are within an easier reach for terrorists compared to the 1970s, largely thanks to information technologies. However, any active application of such technologies leads to higher risk of detection. Queries regarding nuclear weapons development made using internet browsers can be traced by intelligence services [5]. Importantly, nuclear devices built under such conditions can hardly be expected to be reliable, since given the lack of specialists, high-precision equipment, and testing capabilities, it would be difficult to avoid errors during the development or assembly of any such device. In addition, handling major amounts of cash or sourcing fissile weapons-grade materials in the required quantities would inevitably put the terrorist cell on the radars of the intelligence services of a number of countries. As a result, having risked substantial amounts of money and possible detection, an organisation planning to commit an act of nuclear terrorism would have to accept that the outcome is uncertain, at best.
In theory, a committed terrorist could break open the shielded containers of nuclear material inside larger medical devices and use it to make an improvised explosive device laden with radioactive ingredients, known as a "dirty bomb."
But remember: After Sept. 11, 2001, we all thought more attacks were a certainty. Yet al-Qaida and its ideological kin have proved unable to mount a second strike.
A nuclear weapon requires highly enriched uranium (HEU) or plutonium, materials that don't occur in nature and that terrorist groups cannot produce themselves. The ease of access to materials in state stockpiles is thus one of the main factors affecting the odds of a nuclear terrorist attack. The other big factor is motivation. Most terrorist groups have little incentive to pursue nuclear terrorism, since mass murder doesn't serve their political ends—but for some groups, indiscriminate killing is precisely the goal. Most analysts agree that the availability of nuclear weapons and materials, and the utility to terrorist groups of successful nuclear attacks, are the two most important factors in determining the likelihood of nuclear terrorism, even if they disagree over how hard acquiring materials would be or over how many groups might expect to benefit from nuclear terrorism.
It’s not that international diplomacy won’t matter, but individual countries are already taking action to reduce carbon emissions for various reasons beyond worries about climate change.
Beyond Asia, and in the reform of the global order more broadly, China has a long-standing commitment to greater “multipolarity” in the international order. For this reason, it has long been a member of most multilateral institutions within the UN and the Bretton Woods systems. China has used multilateralism as a means to expanding its diplomatic influence in the world, particularly through its membership of the UN Security Council, at a time when its national power was limited. This has now begun to change.
The strategic ties between China and Russia are mutually beneficial and based on trust and a tradition of supporting one another, said Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi, emphasizing that the cooperation is mature and not targeted at third parties.
Amid the fanfare and fireworks of Russia's Victory Day celebrations in May, President Vladimir Putin held a prolific round of talks with his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping, signing 32 deals aimed at further shoring up ties between two superpowers unimpressed with Western dominance in the international community.
As Russia plays host this week to a critical summit of leaders of the emerging market nations of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS), Russian President Vladimir Putin is especially keen on bolstering ties with the leading economic power of the group – China. And he likely won’t have much opposition from the Russian people, who now see China more favorably than at any point since 2002.
Striking evidence of the new closeness between China and Russia was a $400 billion gas deal signed in May last year under which Russia will supply China with 38 billion cubic metres (bcm) of gas annually from 2018 for 30 years. At China’s insistence, the gas will come from new fields in eastern Siberia and will pass through an as yet unbuilt pipeline—the better for ensuring that it will not be diverted elsewhere. Other deals have followed. The biggest was a preliminary agreement signed in November for Russia to sell an additional 30 bcm a year through a proposed pipeline from western Siberia. In every instance it is probable that China was able to drive a hard bargain on price.
This week’s joint naval exercise between Russia and China in the Black and Mediterranean Seas, along with President Xi Jinping’s visit to Moscow last week, highlight the growing ties between Eurasia’s two great powers. Though they share key economic interests and oppose what they claim to be a U.S.-dominated world order, the two nations’ relationship over time promises to be uneven and tense.
There's no question that the Ukraine conflict has led Russia to shift more toward China — but that doesn't mean that everything is smooth sailing for the two countries.
There are two reasons why a nation might decide to go to war over natural resources: because it doesn't have enough of its own, or because it wants to block another country's access to such resources. In all other instances it is cheaper and easier to simply buy whatever you lack. War is a costly affair. Which resources exactly cannot China openly buy from Russia? The answer is none. And if we look at the going price of Russian crude for China, it is actually Moscow that should start a war on Beijing in order to free itself from the enslaving contract. But could it be so that China is wishing to stop someone else from accessing certain resources? Absolutely not. China's competitive point is in flooding the global markets with dirt-cheap commodities. Japan with its hi-tech industry has already stopped manufacturing hard drives, memory stocks and mobile phones locally: it's all made in China nowadays. The only possible reason remaining for a war would be a territorial claim. However, which is more important for China: occupying Russia's Maritime Territory or returning Taiwan? All of Beijing's post-World War II rhetoric has been centred around the idea of reuniting Taiwan with mainland China. Far from being a hidden agenda, this idea openly dominates the Chinese foreign policy. In this respect however it is the USA, not Russia, which stands between Beijing and its coveted goal. China won an important political victory in 1997 by returning Hong Kong; never mind that in order to achieve this, Beijing had to come up with the previously unheard-of "One country, two systems" formula. Only a blind person could fail to see this as a strategic stepping stone in China's plan to achieve similar reunification with Taiwan. In fact, immediately after the Hong Kong sovereignty transfer Beijing's relations with Taipei became much more tolerant and friendly, even though there are still certain problems at times. Another territorial thorn in China's side is the on-going dispute with Japan over the Diaoyu (Senkaku) archipelago in the East China Sea. The islands themselves are of no worth to either side; what is more valuable is the 12-mile territorial waters and 200-mile exclusive economic zone around the archipelago, where hydrocarbon deposits have recently been found. One problem for Beijing, however, is that Japan is a close ally of the USA (not of Russia). Washington has recently reacted very nervously to Beijing's latest Diaoyu-related escapades. Russia for its part limited its reaction to the usual calls on the opposing parties to resolve the conflict peacefully. The USA is not going to stand down its Pacific presence; on the contrary, it is expanding that presence slowly but surely. Xinjiang is another headache for China: Uyghur separatism is raising its head in that region, and local terrorist groups are preparing for action. So far these militants are undergoing training at Islamist camps in Syria but they will be back, team-trained and ready. One more potential problem for Beijing to reckon with is the Taliban, which may again come to power in Afghanistan very soon. The Taliban already has a strong presence in Tajikistan's Gorno-Badakhshan Region, which is situated uncomfortably close to Xinjiang. So is Russia backing the Taliban? Is it Russia that the Taliban is holding talks and consultations in Doha? On the contrary, we are again talking about the USA, represented by senior officials of the Department of State. China does have its share of problems and pressure points. Some of these may well merit a war in the future. But where does Russia come in here? What problems (real problems, not hypothetical ones) would China solve by attacking Russia? Does it really have interests worth fighting Russia for? Of course China can theoretically have issues with Russia, but only if the latter finds itself completely disintegrated as a nation for whatever reason. Only in that case will Beijing have to cross the Amur, and even then its aim would be not to conquer its neighbour but to create a buffer zone against millions of potential Russian refugees. Even then, such a scenario could hardly be described as a full-blown war. On the other hand, it does have at least some relevance as distinct from the numerous role-playing horror stories.
Antitrust investigations are no longer limited to a nation’s borders, or even to a region. Enforcers are more and more sharing information and coordinating their investigative efforts as they strive to uniformly enforce the antitrust laws.
VICTORIA, Canada - Adm. Harry Harris Jr., commander of U.S. Pacific Fleet, spent time interacting with Royal Canadian Navy leadership and sailors during a visit to Victoria, British Columbia, Oct. 7, emphasizing the significance of the relationship between the two navies as the U.S. rebalances to the Pacific.
When President Barack Obama recently vetoed a bill supporting the controversial Keystone XL pipeline, it reinforced the view that US-Canada ties are cool and that his personal relationship with Prime Minister Stephen Harper is even icier.
The U.S.-China relationship is strong and improving, U.S. Economic Minister Counselor Jonathan Fritz told a roundtable of American businesses at AmCham Shanghai on January 20, 2015. Mr. Fritz, spent the morning at AmCham Shanghai discussing the current U.S.-China bilateral economic relationship, the focus of the U.S. government’s China team in 2015, and upcoming hot topics and major economic issues with AmCham Shanghai member companies. Members also provided their views on the state of the bilateral economic relationship and updated him on their investment outlook.
My very strong sense is that China does not want to conquer the world; it wants to secure its borders and live in peace -- as does the United States. Our number one problem is that the USA and China do not know one another. Our old ways of viewing one another are remnants of the Cold War. A new century requires a new way of looking at one another. We must move away quickly from viewing one another as potential enemies to a view that as friends there is no problem we cannot solve.
Meanwhile, China is involved in a conflict with most of its neighbors, including Japan, which has a security pact with the United States. If a war breaks out between China and Japan, the U.S. will have to jump in to protect its ally. Rising tensions in these geographies have sparked fears that a war is imminent. But international relations scholars believe that a war is unlikely between the U.S. and Russia or China. Foreign Policy conducted a survey in collaboration with Teaching, Research, and International Policy (TRIP). They interviewed 1,395 international relations scholars across the United States. Findings of the study revealed that the opinion of scholars was dramatically different from the mainstream public opinion. What experts say about a new Cold War with Russia When asked how likely was a war between the U.S. and Russia or China in the next 10 years, they said that war between these powers was unlikely. They added that war between the U.S. and China was far less likely than between the U.S. and Russia. Foreign Policy also surveyed scholars in Russia and East Asia. On a scale of 0 to 10, for all scholars, the average perceived risk of war with China was 1.91. The figure was a little higher at 2.55 for the likeliness of a war with Russia. Then they asked scholars whether the U.S. and Russia were headed back to a Cold War. Less than 38% scholars believed that the two countries were on the verge of a new Cold War. Over 47% said a Cold War was unlikely, while about 15% were uncertain.
In the medium term, the report analyzes the vulnerability of the U.S.-China relationship to the dynamics of “Thucydides’ Trap,” whereby rising great powers have historically ended up at war with established great powers when one has sought to pre-empt the other at a time of perceived maximum strategic opportunity. According to case studies, such situations have resulted in war in 12 out of 16 instances over the last 500 years. 6 Xi Jinping is deeply aware of this strategic literature and potential implications for U.S.-China relations. This has, in part, underpinned his desire to reframe U.S.-China relations from strategic competition to “a new type of great power relationship.”
Three concepts define how Xi Jinping’s leadership differs from that of his predecessors: his personal authority; his deep sense of national mission; and an even deeper sense of urgency. Xi’s audacious leadership style sets him apart from the modern Chinese norm. Both in personality and policy, he represents one part continuity and two parts change. Xi is the most powerful Chinese leader since Deng (Deng Xiaoping 邓小平), and possibly since Mao (Mao Zedong 毛泽东). Whereas his predecessors believed in, and by and large practiced, the principle of collective leadership, Xi Jinping is infinitely more primus than he is primus inter pares. As a Party blue blood, he also exudes a self-confidence that comes from someone utterly comfortable with the exercise of political power.
A Gallup poll conducted last year found that 50% Americans believe the country was headed back to Cold War. While the mainstream public opinion is highly pessimistic, there is very little chance of a nuclear war between the two powers. Russian political analyst Fyodor Lukyanov recently told Vox that "a war is not something that's impossible anymore." Even if the two countries engage in a conflict, could it lead to a nuclear war? Political analyst Jay Ulfelder, who runs the Dart-Throwing Chimp blog, conducted a survey. He asked people on the online political science expert communities two questions: What are the odds of a Russia vs U.S. war before 2020; and if such a conflict occurred, whether it would turn into a nuclear war. He collected responses and ran them through statistical analysis. Ulfelder found that only 11% people said there was a probability of war between the two countries. Conditional on war, there was 18% probability that one or both sides will resort to nuclear weapons. Ulfelder translated these figures into a single number: 2% probability of a nuclear war between the U.S. and Russia. Difference between mainstream public and   expert opinion The results of his survey are in line with that of a survey by Teaching, Research, and International Policy (TRIP). TRIP asked scholars, “How likely is a war between the United States and Russia over the next decade? Please use the 0–10 scale with 10 indicating that war will definitely occur.” They received responses from 2,040 scholars. On a scale of 0-10, the average perceived risk of war with Russia was 2.55. Their opinions were dramatically different from the mainstream public opinion. On the occasion of the U.S. Independence Day, Russian President Vladimir Putin said in a message of greetings to President Obama that even though some disagreements exist between the U.S. and Russia, they could peacefully resolve the issues through dialogue. Putin said relations between Moscow and Washington were "a crucial factor for international stability."
But no matter how effective the early warning systems, neither Russia nor the United States is capable of defending itself against an all-out missile attack from the other. "The United States has been very clear that it would be impossible, foolhardy, and a fool's errand to try to defend against a Russian nuclear attack," Tom Collina, director of policy at Ploughshares Fund, an anti-nuclear proliferation think tank, told VICE News. "The only thing defending against a nuclear attack is Russia's own self-restraint and wisdom. Nuclear deterrence is what holds the balance of terror in place, not defenses."
Recent events have prompted a flurry of headlines suggesting that "the world is on the brink of World War III." I don't think so. "World war" involves a confrontation between opposing coalitions of global powers. What do we have now? On one side we have lonely and economically weakened Russia, and on the other — the rest of the civilized world. The fighting in Ukraine is a local conflict that has none of the preconditions for spreading further. Putin will never attack a NATO country. Even the possibility that NATO could deliver a limited supply of weapons to Ukraine has sent Putin into a poorly concealed panic. No, he will never attack NATO. Putin must hate going it alone. After all, last spring and summer he tried mightily to convince other member states of the Collective Security Treaty Organization — the military alliance between former Soviet republics — to support Russia's actions in Ukraine. He did not need the CSTO to beef up Russia's armed forces, but to give the aggression greater political weight. Putin undoubtedly had the precedent of 1968 in mind, when Warsaw Pact countries sent their tanks into Czechoslovakia for the ostensible purpose of putting down a rebellion. That was, after all, a collective decision and the responsibility for those actions belongs to several states that supposedly made the joint decision to prevent a revolution from occurring in one of their member countries. However, ever after convening the CSTO in Moscow twice last year, the members did not support the idea of Russia's Ukrainian venture. What's more, Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev and Belarussian President Alexander Lukashenko have never once publicly supported Putin's actions in Ukraine. Moscow's closest potential military allies all refused to participate in that military intervention. Is it therefore logical that they would sign up for a "world war" against the entire Western world? Of course not. Those in the West who oppose supplying Ukraine with modern arms offer several arguments. The first is that it would not subdue the aggressor, but rather provoke Russia into increasing its military presence.
THE world is on the brink of a new Cold War. Some say that it has already begun," said Mikhail Gorbachev, the last president of the Soviet Union and the man who inadvertently administered a mercy killing to Communism in Europe. He’s 83 years old, he played a leading role in ending the last Cold War, and he’s practically a secular saint. Surely he knows what he’s talking about. No, he doesn't. Not only has this new Cold War not begun already, but it's hard to see how you could get it going even if you tried. The raw material for such an enterprise is simply unavailable. You can summon the ghosts of history all you want, but they are dead, and they can't hear you. Gorbachev was speaking in Berlin, now once again the capital of a united Germany, on the 25th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall. Even he would agree it turned out to be, on balance, a good thing, but he is a great deal more ambivalent about the collapse of European communism and the dismantling of the Soviet Union. His original goal, and his hope right down to the end in 1991, was to save communism by reforming it, not to bury it. He also believed, or at least hoped, that if he could make Communist rule "democratic" and user-friendly, he could save the Soviet Union as well. But the Soviet Union was just the old Russian empire in new clothes. Gorbachev was and is a romantic, and he undoubtedly agrees with his rather less cuddly successor as president of Russia, Vladimir Putin, that the collapse of the Soviet Union was "the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the 20th century." So of course he ends up defending Putin's actions and blaming the United States and NATO for this alleged drift into a new Cold War. It's all nonsense. Nothing could have saved the old Soviet Union. It was the last of the European empires to fall, mainly because it was land-based rather than sea-based, but only half its population was Russian. When it finally dissolved, 15 different nations emerged from the wreckage, and its collapse was no greater a loss to civilization than the fall of the British or French empires. And the main reason you can't have a new Cold War is precisely because the "evil empire" (as Ronald Reagan famously called the Soviet Union) no longer exists. There is only Russia, a largely de-industrialized country that is run by a kleptocratic elite and makes its living by exporting oil and gas. Russia has only 140 million people (less than half the United States, less than a third of the European Union), and its armies are no longer based around Berlin and all through eastern Europe. They are 750 kilometres further east, guarding Russia's own frontiers. They occasionally grab a bit of territory that isn't covered by a NATO guarantee (Abkhazia, South Ossetia, Transnistria, Crimea, Luhansk, Donestk), but they dare not go any further. So you could get a really unpleasant NATO-Russian confrontation out of this for a while (although it hasn't happened yet), but not a real Cold War in the old globe-spanning style. Russia just couldn't hold up its end of it. As for World War Three, don't worry. Putin cares a lot about saving face, but not that much. Which leaves the question: Who is to blame for this regrettable hostility between Russia and the western powers? The West, in Gorbachev's view. In fact, he had a whole list of complaints about western threats, crimes and betrayals. NATO broke its promise and let all the eastern European countries that had been Soviet satellites during the Cold War join NATO. It let Kosovo declare its independence from Russia's traditional friend, Serbia. It launched wars of "regime change" in the Middle East (Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya) that Moscow disapproved of. It even planned a missile defence system that allegedly threatened Russia's nuclear deterrent (if you could believe that it would work). Yes, Russia has been invaded a lot in its history, but the licence to be paranoid expires after 50 years. Of course, the eastern European countries all clamoured to join NATO; they're still terrified of Russia. The western great powers do lots of stupid stuff and some seriously bad stuff, and Russia has also done a fair amount of both in the past decade-and-a-half under Putin. The job of diplomats, and of leaders in particular, is to avoid the really stupid and dangerous stuff and keep the rest to a minimum. U.S. President Barack Obama has been quite good at that, as has German Chancellor Angela Merkel. Putin used to be good at it, but is not so good now, perhaps because he has been in power too long. His military interventions in Ukraine have been alarmingly rash. But nobody is going to go to war with Russia over Ukraine. The Ukrainians were told years ago they couldn't shelter under NATO's security blanket, and they have chosen to defy Moscow anyway. They may pay a high price for that, and the western alliance's relations with Russia may go into the deep freeze for the remainder of Putin's reign. But it will be just a little local difficulty, not a huge event that defines an entire era.
Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev told CNBC that a "reset" of relations with the United States is "impossible" and that ties between the two powers had been damaged by "destructive" and "stupid" [asinine] sanctions imposed on the country in response for its role in the conflict in neighboring Ukraine. In an exclusive interview that aired Wednesday, Medvedev said any suggestion of a "reset," as suggested by Russia's Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov in September was out of the question. "No, of course not. It's absolutely impossible. Let's be clear: we did not come up with these sanctions. Our international partners did," Medvedev said in Tuesday's interview. On other points, Medvedev said — the world must move away from its dependence on the U.S. dollar. — and Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott should watch what he says about Russian President Vladimir Putin. Western countries have imposed wide-ranging sanctions on Russia since its annexation of the Crimean peninsula in March, targeting banks, oil producers and defense companies. In response, Russia has imposed retaliatory measures such as banning imports of European and U.S. fruit and vegetables. Medvedev said the country would overcome the sanctions, and he believed they would be lifted in the near future. But they had "no doubt" damaged relations. He said he understood former Soviet countries' concerns over Ukraine. But he felt that the "foundations international relations" were being undermined by the punishing sanctions. The position was "destructive" and "stupid," he said. Medvedev expressed dismay at President Barack Obama's speech before the UN General Assembly in which he labeled Russia a key threat, second only to the deadly Ebola virus and ahead of the terrorist threat posed by Islamic State.
For the first time, Japanese forces will participate in the biennial joint Australian and US “Talisman Sabre” exercise, now underway in military training areas in northern Australia. Along with the war games in Australia, the exercise involves key US naval and air force command centres in Guam, Hawaii and the US west coast. A delegation of 40 Japanese military personnel has joined what amounts to a large-scale dress rehearsal for a military confrontation with China in the Asia-Pacific region. The exercise was formally launched last Saturday, when Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott toured the Blue Ridge, the command ship of the US Navy’s Pacific Fleet, as it arrived in Sydney Harbour. The propaganda event was designed to promote the US-Australia military alliance and invoke a wartime atmosphere. Attempting to imitate a US president’s “commander-in-chief” persona, Abbott landed aboard the ship on a military helicopter dressed in an Air Force flight jacket and headgear. A horde of media was on hand to record him, wearing his military garb, being welcomed by a US admiral and the American ambassador to Australia, John Berr. Abbott hailed the US military as a “comforting presence” amid “significant challenges in many parts of the world.” Under conditions in which the US, Australia and Japan are threatening to take action to assert “freedom of navigation” in the South China Sea near Chinese-held islands and reefs, Talisman Sabre involves a wide range of military assets training for potential combat situations. These extend from naval encounters and air attacks on ships, to long-range bombing and marine beach landings. Last Sunday, “Open Days” were held at military bases in Darwin and Rockhampton in northern Australia, so the media could broadcast imagery of Australian and American military hardware and troops operating alongside each other. Talisman Sabre will involve 21 ships, three submarines, over 200 aircraft and more than 33,000 personnel from the US and Australia, as well as 640 New Zealand personnel and the Japanese contingent. The US Navy has sent the aircraft carrier George Washington and its support ships, which will train with Australian forces off northeastern Australia. A marine expeditionary unit aboard the amphibious assault ship Bonhomme Richard, supported by US and Australian submarines and ships, will exercise off the coast of Darwin—within striking distance of the strategic Sunda and Lombok Straits through Indonesia. In the event of conflict with China, the US “AirSea Battle” concept envisages northern Australia being the base of operations for a naval blockade of these sea lanes, in order to starve the Chinese economy of oil and other natural resources and strangle its international trade. The key Malacca Straits, through which 80 percent of all Chinese sea-borne imports and exports pass, would also be blockaded in joint operations involving the US, Australia, Japan, Singapore and other allied forces. A number of long-range B1 bombers currently based in Guam have been retooled over the past four years into ship-killers, armed with highly accurate missiles that can hit a vessel at sea from distances of up to 300 kilometres. Following statements in May by David Shear, the assistant secretary of defense for Asian and Pacific security affairs, that the US will “place” B1 bombers in Australia, close attention will be paid as to whether Talisman Sabre tests out such plans by sending some of the aircraft for bombing training in northern Australia. The US “pivot” to Asia, officially unveiled by the Obama administration in 2011, is aimed at concentrating 60 percent of the US Navy and Air Force in the region, and developing the network of military alliances and partnerships necessary to wage war against China. The involvement of Japanese personnel in Talisman Sabre is highly significant. In a 2013 US strategic study, Japan and Australia were described as the “northern and southern anchors” of the pivot. Under the right-wing government of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, Japan is being steadily remilitarised. Abe has pushed through parliament a reinterpretation of the country’s pacifist constitution to permit “collective self-defence”—that is, the ability to deploy the Japanese military in wars wherever the US or another Japanese ally are allegedly under attack. Last month, Japan participated in a provocative joint military exercise with the Philippines in the vicinity of the disputed territories in the South China Sea and initiated talks with Manila on basing ships and aircraft in the country. Japan has its own volatile territorial dispute with China over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands in the East China Sea. Close encounters regularly take place between Japanese and Chinese aircraft. If conflict breaks out, the Obama administration has guaranteed it will join Japan in a war against China. Australia would be inevitably drawn in also, not only by virtue of its alliance with the US and the American satellite and communications bases in the country, but because of its growing military relations with Tokyo. While Australia and Japan do not have a formal defence alliance, Abbott and Abe have declared the countries have a “special relationship” and signed agreements on the exchange of military technology. Washington has actively encouraged the closer ties.
This is a pivotal year in U.S.-Japan relations. As the two nations mark the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II in August, it is a moment for both the American and Japanese publics to reflect on the past — but also, with Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe visiting the United States in late April, to take the temperature of the current bilateral relationship and to consider its future. As both countries face the rising strategic and economic challenge posed by China, the United States is explicitly rebalancing its international posture toward Asia. Japan has fractious relations with U.S. ally South Korea over unresolved issues involving their mutual history, and with U.S. adversary China over both history and territorial disputes. At the same time, to the consternation of both Seoul and Beijing, Tokyo is debating a more active role in collective regional security. And the United States and Japan are the key economies in an unprecedented effort — known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership — to broaden and deepen trade and investment among Pacific countries that account for more than one-third of the world’s GDP. How the American and Japanese people see these issues may go a long way toward framing the ongoing relationship of these onetime foes and now longtime allies. Adversaries in World War II, fierce economic competitors in the 1980s and early 1990s, Americans and Japanese nonetheless share a deep mutual respect today. Roughly two-thirds of Americans trust Japan either a great deal (26 percent) or a fair amount (42 percent), according to a new Pew Research Center survey. And three-quarters of Japanese share a similar degree of trust of the United States, though their intensity is somewhat less (10 percent a great deal, 65 percent a fair amount). There is a gender gap in how the two publics see each other. American men (76 percent) are more trusting of Japan than American women (59 percent), just as Japanese men (82 percent) voice greater trust in the United States than do Japanese women (68 percent). But there is no significant partisan difference in how Americans see Japan. Looking ahead, Americans generally support keeping the U.S. relationship with Japan about where it is, both economically and strategically. When asked whether they would prefer the United States to be closer to Japan, less close, or about as close to Japan as it has been in recent years, 38 percent say closer, 45 percent say about as close, and only 13 percent would like to distance the United States from Japan. There is, however, a generation gap in viewing the future of the relationship: 41 percent of younger Americans would like to see closer ties, but only 27 percent of older Americans would. And there is partisan disagreement on the trajectory of the relationship with Japan: Democrats (41 percent) are more likely than Republicans (30 percent) to support closer ties. China looms large in the minds of both Americans and Japanese in their consideration of the U.S.-Japan relationship. Only 30 percent of Americans and just 7 percent of Japanese trust China. One reason Americans may trust China more is that only 16 percent say they have heard a lot about territorial disputes between China and neighboring countries. Americans are somewhat divided on whether the United States should be focusing more on Japan or on China when it comes to developing strong economic ties. Overall, a slightly larger share of Americans (43 percent) name China as the more important economic partner than Japan (36 percent). About one in eight Americans (12 percent) volunteered an alternative: that it is important to have a strong economic relationship with both. Americans’ views on the relative importance of economic ties with Japan and China divide along generational, racial, and partisan lines. In particular, young Americans believe it is more important to have a strong economic relationship with China: About six in 10 Americans ages 18 to 29 hold this view. Less than half as many people 65 years of age and older agree. At the same time, twice as many older Americans as younger ones believe a strong economic relationship with Japan is a priority. Republicans are more likely than Democrats to want better relations with Japan. Meanwhile, Democrats are more likely than the GOP to want stronger economic ties with China. There are no such divisions in Japan on future economic relations with China and the United States. Nearly eight in 10 Japanese (78 percent) say it is more important to have strong economic connections with the United States, while only 10 percent cite China. Young Japanese are more likely than their elders to back a deeper economic relationship with the United States, but the preference for the United States among all age groups, and among all demographic subgroups in Japan, is still overwhelming. Six in 10 Americans think China’s rise makes relations between the United States and Japan more important. Just 6 percent say it makes ties less important and 29 percent believe it makes no difference. Men (67 percent) are more likely than women (54 percent), whites (67 percent) more than non-whites (48 percent), and Americans 65 years of age and older (65 percent) more likely than those ages 18 to 29 (51 percent) to hold the view that the Japan relationship is now more important because of China’s rise. There is also a disparity in how Americans and Japanese view South Korea. Nearly half (49 percent) of Americans trust Seoul, but only 21 percent of Japanese do. Much of this Japanese-Korean enmity arises out of the unresolved legacy of Japan’s colonial occupation of Korea through the end of World War II. A 2013 Pew Research Center survey found that 98 percent of South Koreans felt that Japan had not apologized sufficiently for its activities in the 1930s and 1940s. One of the contentious issues is the Japanese army’s use of Korean “comfort women” — women forced into prostitution — which many Koreans believe Japan has not atoned for sufficiently. The Korean-American community has made this issue a cause célèbre and it may well come up in the press during Abe’s late-April visit to the United States. Yet 57 percent of Americans say they have never heard of the tensions over the comfort women issue. At the same time, the American public is divided over whether Japan should play a more active military role in helping to maintain peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region: 47 percent would like to see Tokyo take a more active role and 43 percent would prefer that Japan limit its role. Americans who trust Japan are more likely to want to see Tokyo play a greater strategic role in the region. And Americans who do not trust China are also more likely to want to see Japan take on more of the military burden in Asia. Among Japanese, there is little desire for their country to play a greater part in the region’s security. Just over two-thirds (68 percent) want Japan to limit its military activity. Only 23 percent want the country to take on more defense responsibilities. Notably, it is Japanese men (30 percent) more than women (17 percent) who would like to see a more forward-leaning national strategic posture. Japan and the United States have deeply rooted economic and strategic bonds. But, since both nations are functioning democracies, those ties also depend on the attitudes of the Japanese and American people. Seven decades after a horrific war, and despite serious trade frictions in the past and a new challenge posed by China, Americans and Japanese share a mutual trust and respect that is the glue of the relationship.
WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe touted reinvigorated security ties and progress on a trade accord as the two leaders vowed to work together on issues ranging from maritime disputes to cyber threats. After Tuesday’s White House meeting, though, Mr. Abe faces a tougher venue Wednesday when he addresses a joint session of Congress and campaigns for a sweeping, 12-nation trade agreement. On Capitol Hill, Mr. Abe will encounter strong Democratic resistance to the Trans-Pacific Partnership and is likely to face pressure to atone for Japan’s wartime cruelty. Messrs. Obama and Abe’s remarks made clear that the prime minister’s official visit to Washington is unlikely to yield a final breakthrough on the trade accord or a fresh public apology for Japan’s legacy of “comfort women,” who were forced to serve Japanese soldiers in brothels during World War II. During a news conference at the White House, the two leaders pledged to move ahead with a trade agreement between the U.S. and Japan that would clear the way for a broader pact among 12 Pacific nations—a deal that Mr. Obama said would include strong protections for workers. Still, they acknowledged the obstacles to a deal that remain in the U.S. and Japan. “The politics around trade can be hard in both our countries,” Mr. Obama said. He added that he and Mr. Abe both are committed to completing an agreement but noted, “It’s never fun passing a trade bill in this town.” Mr. Abe said he hoped to bring an early conclusion to the Pacific trade pact. “We welcome the fact that significant progress was made. We will continue to cooperate to lead the TPP talks to its last phase,” Mr. Abe said. “It should be a model for China in that it’s an ambitious attempt to create a new economic sphere in which people, goods and money will flow freely within the Asia-Pacific region.” China was a prominent topic in the talks Tuesday, with both leaders expressing concern over Beijing’s territorial ambitions in the Asia-Pacific region. But both said that strengthened U.S.-Japan trade and military ties weren’t intended to provoke China. Mr. Obama said the renewal of U.S.-Japan ties were designed to combat maritime disputes in the Pacific and better address emerging problems such as cyber threats. “We don’t think that a strong U.S.-Japan alliance should be seen as a provocation,” the president said. “But I think we have to do it in a way that brings China and other countries into a common effort to maintain order and peace in the region.” Mr. Abe said new trade ties with the U.S. weren't being crafted “out of consciousness about China.” Mr. Obama said the 12-nation trade deal would boost the U.S. economy while keeping China from further dominating the region. “It’s going to open up markets that currently are not fully opened to U.S. businesses. It’s going to be good for the U.S. economy,” Mr. Obama said. “And because I always believe that good policy ends up being good politics, I’m confident we’re going to end up getting the votes in Congress.” In recent days, Mr. Obama has expressed frustration with fellow Democrats who argue an agreement would hurt American workers. He is depending largely on Republicans to help pass so-called fast-track legislation that would allow Congress to vote on trade pacts, including the Pacific accord, but not to amend the deals. Mr. Abe will face skepticism from many Democrats on the issue of trade when he becomes the first Japanese prime minister to address a joint session of Congress on Wednesday. Additionally, Rep. Paul Ryan of Wisconsin, a key Republican leader on trade issues, also issued a challenge to Mr. Abe this week, calling on the prime minister to drop Japan’s agricultural and auto industry barriers. “In the near team, the clearest sign of a successful state visit would be a firm commitment from Abe to eliminate the farm and auto barriers,” Mr. Ryan wrote in an op-ed article in the Washington Post. Some lawmakers also have called on Mr. Abe to reaffirm and validate previous Japanese war apologies. On Tuesday, Mr. Abe declined to offer a new apology for his country’s World War II treatment of women enslaved by the Japanese Imperial army. The prime minister said he would uphold the Japanese government’s earlier apologies for the plight of “comfort women.” He told reporters he was “deeply pained” by the wartime treatment of comfort women and stressed Japan’s efforts to promote women’s rights in recent years. Koreans, Korean-Americans and others hope he will issue fresh statements of remorse while in the U.S. But so far, he has avoided doing so in public comments in Boston and at the White House. He’s unlikely to go further in Congress, but it will be important for Mr. Abe to reiterate his support of the Japanese government’s previous stances on the treatment of women enslaved by the Japanese imperial army, said Sheila Smith, a senior fellow for Japan studies at the Council on Foreign Relations. “What he says will be amplified on the Hill,” Ms. Smith said. “He will not go beyond that, because it’s not an issue for the United States and Japan, it’s an issue for Japan and South Korea to really speak to.” Talks between U.S. and Japanese officials in advance of Tuesday’s summit resulted in a statement on economic, military and technological cooperation, including an agreement to jointly work on high-speed-rail projects, a Japanese priority for Mr. Abe’s trip. The two governments also issued a statement outlining a vision for the relationship between “former adversaries who have become steadfast allies.” Messrs. Obama and Abe were to conclude their visit with an elaborate dinner and reception in the State Dining Room, expected to last late into the evening.
Asia’s rise is going to need careful management by the U.S. and the EU, The U.S. and EU must manage their reactions to the rise of Asia because this transition for it has the potential to deepen existing strains in the transatlantic relationship. The need for America and Europe to manage cope with such external influences is hardly new. Transatlantic relations have been buffeted over the years by trends ranging from Europe’s process of de-colonisation to America’s Vietnam War, and from conflict in the Middle East to war in Afghanistan. Global changes affect North America and Europe differently, and so can lead to misunderstandings because the long-term rise of Asia will change the world. Europeans and Americans need to build a more nuanced understanding of their shared interests. There are different interpretations of the rise of Asia, but five aspects are particularly interesting. It can be seen as an economic phenomenon, a strategic challenge, a global power shift, a recognition of the re-emergence of China and India, and an acknowledgement of the many “middle powers” in the region. All five interpretations are likely to influence the views from North America and Europe. Asia contains a number of the largest economies in the world. China last year accounted for over 16% of global GNP, as measured by purchasing power parity. Japan for 5.4%, India 5.8% and the U.S. 16.3%. Although trade is important, investment flows show a more complex relationship. International capital is taking a renewed interest in stable, established markets now the sparkle of emerging ones is being dimmed by slower growth. For European countries, Asia and especially China has become a source of investment income. The economic crisis has ushered in an era of inadequate intra-European investment, creating a profound need for investment in Europe just at a time when China wanted to invest its huge surpluses internationally. Chinese investors and others found bargains in Europe. The result is that Chinese foreign direct investment (FDI) into the EU grew a whopping 338% between 2010-2012. UNCTAD reports that Chinese investment in the United Kingdom doubled from $1.4bn, it was $2.8bn during that period, and the overall value of Chinese investment stock in the EU rose to $31.5bn from a mere $1.3bn in 2006. Chinese investment in the U.S. reached $17bn in 2012, up from a similarly low level of $1.2bn in 2006. Yet, despite this dramatic increase in Chinese investment, the U.S. and Europe are still by far each other’s most significant economic partners. In 2012, the U.S. accounted for about a quarter of the EU’s foreign investments, with China trailing far behind at 6.1%, Hong Kong at 5.9% and India only 2.1%. As to U.S. foreign investment, Europe received $2.7 trillion in 2013, almost a fifth of which went to the UK alone. Asia as a whole was of far less interest than Europe to American investors, getting $695bn in 2013, of which $61.5bn went to China. The transatlantic partners know well that increased investment brings deeper social engagement. But corporate investors’ decisions can also affect local labour conditions, and now some of the most difficult negotiations over TTIP relate to investment disputes. The perception that other countries’ standards are not as high as your own creates a politically charged climate for negotiations. Europe has agreed investment provisions with Canada, but is still debating them with the U.S. in the TTIP negotiations. Europeans worry that American companies will use the investor state dispute mechanisms to circumvent the EU’s labour, health and safety standards. For their part, the Europeans want such mechanisms to be included in the pending EU-China bilateral investment treaty precisely to protect them from local actions in the less transparent Chinese dispute resolution system. Different types of investors in China enjoy different degrees of market access, with the state-owned enterprises there controlling an important segment of Chinese international investment, although They are less transparent than many commercial investors yet wield political clout. Europe arguably needs this investment agreement more than China as it wants greater access to Chinese markets, while China already benefits from access to Europe’s open economies. One possible source of transatlantic tension is that the U.S., and but only some EU countries, requires a security review of investments by foreign government entities. This raises questions about whether NATO-member the EU countries will be able to develop acceptable investment rules with some Asian countries from a security perspective. The rise of Asia is creating opportunities, but is also opening new areas for politically charged debate. The biggest transatlantic divergence over Asia’s rise is the strategic outlook now that many Asian countries are greatly increasing their military spending. China last year spent $216.4bn, triple its 2006 defence budget of $71.4bn. While the U.S. accounts for over a third of global military spending, China’s share has risen to 12.25%. Part of the heralded U.S. “rebalance” to Asia reflects Washington’s efforts to revitalise transpacific political and security relationships as Asia raises strategic and political issues for America as well as economic ones. Europeans may speak of Asia as a neighbouring region, but for many Americans the U.S. is part of the Asia/Pacific region. Fifty million Americans live in the five states that border the Pacific Ocean. The United States is not alone among the countries of the Asia/Pacific region to have been alarmed by China’s adventurism in the East China and the South China Seas. Yet from a U.S perspective the rise of Asia in strategic terms means not only the challenge of a more assertive China but also the benefit of more capable regional partners for Washington. America and Japan have been allies for over 60 years, and Australia and New Zealand have been bound by the ANZUS treaty for as long. The U.S. and India have moved closer together over the past decade in a stronger security relationship, with their 2008 agreement and subsequent work to bring India closer to international nuclear weapons control regimes having removed barriers to more widespread co-operation. The re-emergence of Asia is recalibrating global power balances. These changes are likely to have a particular impact on Europe, whose leaders may feel they need to ingratiate themselves with the emerging Asian powers to stay in the game. While the United States will be a large and powerful country for decades to come, Europe may feel disadvantaged in its relations with Asia, and that could cause tensions with the U.S. Close transatlantic communications can help to avert possible misunderstandings. Amid these changes, the United States and Europe are not competitors because they are not playing the same game. For the U.S., the rise of Asia raises strategic, political, and economic issues. As the current leader of the international system, the United States must consider whether emerging powers aim to be peer competitors and systemic rivals or spoilers, or stakeholders sharing the burdens of managing global crises. For Europe, the rise of Asia is largely being treated as an economic issue, but with political overtones. This discrepancy of approach could cause tensions as Americans may wish for greater European support to defend the norms and standards they also claim to champion. They need to ensure that they do not undercut each other in their respective trade and investment negotiations. Europeans may harbour the same concern about American approaches as trade and investment negotiations are an important frontier of human rights and labour standards. For Americans, one of the positive arguments for TTIP is that it would be an agreement between parties with high human rights, environmental and labour standards, so TTIP would be good for economic and human well-being. One place we may see the influence of Atlantic states in Asia may be the negotiation of TPP in which include the U.S., Canada and Mexico. All three see themselves as Atlantic and Pacific countries. Meanwhile, European and other countries which join the Chinese-sponsored Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank can help reinforce global standards when shaping this institution.
BERLIN — While President Obama has tried to soften the blow, this week’s disclosures about the extent of America’s spying on its European allies have added to a series of issues that have sharply eroded confidence in the United States’ leadership at a particularly difficult moment. The sharp words from Germany, France and others this week are part of a broader set of frustrations over issues like the Syrian civil war, the danger posed to the global economy by Washington’s fiscal fights and the broader perception that President Obama himself — for all his promises to rebuild relations with allies after the presidency of George W. Bush — is an unreliable partner. This American administration is “misreading and miscalculating the effects” of its deeds in a Europe that is less ready than it once was to heed the United States, said Annette Heuser, executive director of the Bertelsmann Foundation, a research organization in Washington. Early on Friday, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President François Hollande of France emerged from a meeting of European leaders to call for talks with the United States on new rules for their intelligence relationship. A statement from the European leaders said a “lack of trust” could undermine trans-Atlantic intelligence cooperation. Earlier in the week the European Parliament had acted to suspend an agreement with the United States that allows it to track the finances of terrorist groups, citing suspicions that the United States authorities were tapping European citizens’ personal financial data. The disclosures contained in the documents leaked by the former National Security Agency contractor Edward J. Snowden have crystallized a growing sense in Europe that post-Sept. 11 America has lost some of the values of privacy and accountability that have been the source of the world’s admiration for its version of democracy. So fierce was the anger in Berlin over suspicions that American intelligence had tapped into Ms. Merkel’s cellphone that Elmar Brok of Germany, the chairman of the European Parliament’s foreign affairs committee and a pillar of trans-Atlantic exchanges since 1984, spoke Friday of America’s security establishment as a creepy “state within a state.” Since Sept. 11, 2001, he said, “the balance between freedom and security has been lost.” To be sure, the United States and Europe are like a bickering couple that will never break up. For all the sharp words, they cannot even begin to contemplate an actual divorce. Many of the European complaints about the United States also seem directed mainly at a domestic audience, and may not result in concrete changes to a relationship that has weathered many storms. But the United States under Mr. Obama had lost a considerable amount of European patience and good will even before the latest round of disclosures from the leaked N.S.A. documents. First came the diplomatic shambles over Syria, where, in late summer, the United States seemed poised for military action after the killing of hundreds by chemical weapons. France keenly backed America, as did Britain’s prime minister, David Cameron. But Mr. Cameron unexpectedly failed to get support from his Parliament, Mr. Obama wavered, Russia stepped in with a last-minute diplomatic solution that left Germany and other nations diplomatically bruised, and France was left hanging out to dry. Barely had the trans-Atlantic partners gotten over that discomfort than the divisive partisan politics of Washington precipitated a government shutdown and brought the United States — and thus Europe and the world — to the brink of default and economic turmoil. This week, two American ambassadors, Charles H. Rivkin in France and John B. Emerson in Germany, were summoned to the Foreign Ministries in Paris and Berlin for a dressing down by two of America’s closest friends. The depressing spectacle reversed the traditional roles played by Europe and America, certainly for Germany. France is a proud nuclear power, and while relations have been exceptionally warm in recent years, it is strongly independent and a frequent critic, particularly of American culture. I find it so deeply saddening how isolated the U.S. has become in a relatively short amount of time by alienating everyone and then innocently wonders why there is so much anti-Americanism out there. “This sort of practice between partners that invades privacy is totally unacceptable, and we have to make sure, very quickly, that this no longer happens,” he said. “We fully agree that we cooperate to fight terrorism. It is indispensable. But this does not justify that personal data of millions of our compatriots are snooped on.” Germany, basically a post-World War II creation of the United States and its allies, is much less accustomed to such lecturing, with Germans to this day frequently referring to the United States as their country’s school for democracy. Now, said Guntram Wulff, director of Breugel, a policy organization in Brussels, “the students are calling the teacher,” reminding the Obama administration of democratic values. That the call came from a German chancellor who was raised in Communist East Germany, and thus has personal familiarity with government spying, heightened the irony and the bitterness. The Snowden documents have led to calls in a number of European countries, especially Germany, for greater assurance that the digital privacy of their citizens is respected. How much leverage Europeans have in order to achieve that in a borderless Internet world is questionable, although as Ms. Heuser noted, the past week has united them as never before in their calls for privacy and better data protection. Even Mr. Cameron of Britain, whose intelligence services are closely allied with their counterparts in the United States, backed the French and Germans in their quest for American cooperation in setting and sticking to new rules for an era of digital data. Yet, even united, the Europeans often feel like bystanders, powerless to stop the dithering or insensitivity of their partner, the world’s No. 1 power. Threats to halt talks on a trans-Atlantic trade deal that would create a free market of about 800 million people in Europe and the United States are empty, since the deal would produce much needed growth and create jobs on both sides of the Atlantic. That mutual dependence has kept the old couple together for decades. But many analysts warn that the younger generation may be far more fickle. The old-guard Atlanticists who nurtured modern Germany knew war, or cold war and division. A year of study in America constituted their discovery of the world. Today’s young Europeans can go anywhere, and glean information from all sorts of sources. A job in Shanghai, Singapore or India is seen as little different from one in Los Angeles or New York, Ms. Heuser said. Meanwhile, in the United States Congress, there are fewer and fewer young members with foreign experience, something once gained, in many cases, by military service. After this week, the older European generation is wondering about the marriage, too. “America has always been about freedom and a guarantor for freedom,” said Mr. Brok, bitterly. “Perhaps we were too naïve.”
Although the trend lines are undoubtedly working in China’s favor, it is ultimately extremely unlikely that China will try to seize Taiwan by force. Furthermore, should it try to do this, it is unlikely to succeed. Even assuming China’s military capabilities are great enough to prevent the U.S. from intervening, there are two forces that would likely be sufficient to deter China from invading Taiwan. The first and least important is the dramatic impact this would have on how countries in the region and around the world would view such a move. Globally, China seizing Taiwan would result in it being permanently viewed as a malicious nation. Regionally, China’s invasion of Taiwan would diminish any lingering debate over how Beijing will use its growing power. Every regional power would see its own fate in Taiwan. Although Beijing would try to reassure countries by claiming that Taiwan was part of China already, and thus the operation was a domestic stability one, this narrative would be convincing to none of China’s neighbors. Consequently, Beijing would face an environment in which each state was dedicated to cooperating with others to balance against Chinese power. But the more important deterrent for China would be the uncertainty of success. To be sure, China’s military capabilities are growing to the point where it will soon be assured of its ability to quickly defeat Taiwan’s military forces. A little longer down the road it will also likely be confident that it can prevent the U.S. from intervening in the conflict. However, as recent U.S. military conflicts have adequately demonstrated, being able to defeat another nation’s armed forces and being able to pacify the country are two different things altogether. It is in this latter aim that China’s strategy is likely to falter. Taiwanese are adamantly opposed to being incorporated into a non-Democratic China. These feelings would only harden in the aftermath of the invasion. Thus, even if it quickly defeated Taiwan’s formal military forces, the PLA would continue to have to contend with the remnants of resistance for years to come. Such a scenario would be deeply unsettling for leaders in Beijing as this defiance would likely inspire similar resistance among various groups on the mainland, starting first and foremost with ethnic minorities in the western China. Should the PLA resort to harsh oppression to squash resistance in Taiwan, this would deeply unsettle even Han Chinese on the mainland. In fact, the clear parallels with how Imperial Japan sought to pacify Taiwan and China would be lost on no one in China and elsewhere. The entire situation would be a nightmare for Chinese leaders. Consequently, they are nearly certain to avoid provoking it by invading Taiwan. The only real scenario in which they would invade Taiwan is if the island nation formally declared independence. But if Taiwanese leaders have avoided doing so to date, they are unlikely to think the idea is very wise as China goes stronger. Thus, the status-quo in the Taiwanese strait is unlikely to be changed by military force. Instead, Beijing is likely to continue drawing Taiwan closer economically, and seeking to disrupt the U.S.-Taiwanese bilateral relationship. The hope would be that leaders in Taipei will ultimately conclude that they cannot resist being absorbed into China, something China itself can facilitate this by offering favorable terms.
China and Taiwan have held their highest-level talks since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949 when the Republic of China government fled to the island after losing to Mao Zedong’s communists. Wang Yu-chi, head of Taiwan’s Mainland Affairs Council, and his mainland Chinese counterpart, Zhang Zhijun, on Tuesday met in the eastern Chinese city of Nanjing, in the latest sign of warming relations between the sides. “Today we can sit here . . . and have official meetings to discuss issues of mutual interest to people on both sides,” said Mr Wang on the first day of a four-day visit. “Cross-Strait relations have entered a new chapter. It’s a memorable day.” While Beijing and Taipei have maintained informal contacts, the meeting in Nanjing – the Chinese capital when the nationalist Kuomintang government was in power – marked the first formal talks on cross-Strait relations since Chiang Kai-shek moved his government to Taiwan six decades ago. The milestone comes four months after Chinese President Xi Jinping said that both sides could not continue their “political disagreements” forever. “The two sides must reach a final resolution, step by step, and these issues cannot be passed on from generation to generation,” Mr Xi said in October, according to Xinhua news agency. The US said it welcomed the moves China and Taiwan had taken to reduce tensions and improve ties. “We encourage authorities in Beijing and Taipei to continue their constructive dialogue, which has led to significant improvements in the cross-strait relationship, so we certainly welcome the resumption,” said Jen Psaki, a state department spokeswoman. China has threatened to use force against Taiwan, which it regards as a renegade province, if it declares independence. But relations have improved dramatically since Ma Ying-jeou was elected Taiwanese president in 2008. The thaw has paved the way for stronger economic ties which have boosted trade and tourism.
Relations between Asia's two biggest economies are finally thawing after two years of rising tensions that included near-clashes in the air.  China and Japan have eased back from the brink, quietly in recent weeks and more openly this week, with representatives of the two nations holding what they described as cordial talks on maritime security and business relations. Outside observers caution that little progress is visible on the fundamental issues dividing the world's second- and third-largest economies. But they say the chance has risen that at a regional summit in Beijing in November, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe will achieve his long-standing wish for direct talks with Chinese President Xi Jinping. "I hope very much to meet" Mr. Xi, said Mr. Abe on Monday in New York, where he was visiting the United Nations. "A meeting and a handshake between leaders alone can lead the way to regional peace and security." On Wednesday, senior Chinese and Japanese diplomats along with defense officials wrapped up two days of discussions in the eastern Chinese city of Qingdao on the topic of East China Sea. That is the location of the small islands, controlled by Japan and claimed by Beijing, that have often been a flash point between the two nations. The two have established overlapping air-defense zones, and earlier this year military aircraft from the two sides were just about 30 meters (yards) apart in an East China Sea encounter, according to the Japanese side. But the meetings this week had a calmer tone and ended with agreement to try to develop better channels of communication. "Leaders at the top on both sides have apparently made a decision that relations were too dangerous, and that it's not in the interests of both countries to be so tense," said Harvard University professor Ezra Vogel, an expert on both Japan and China. Both sides recognize that warmer ties are good for business. Two-way trade was down 6.3% in 2013, according to the Japan External Trade Organization, hurting Japanese exporters. Many Japanese companies have shifted their investment sights to Southeast Asia because of a perception that they aren't welcome in China. That is a problem for Beijing, which is coping with slower growth and a troubled property market. On Wednesday, Chinese Vice Premier Wang Yang in Beijing met Japan's largest trade delegation to China to date, made up of more than 200 business leaders. Mr. Wang told the Japanese delegates he was seeking to resume high-level economic discussions with Tokyo soon—talks that have been suspended since August 2010. "The economy is one factor" behind improved ties, said Liang Yunxiang, a professor of international politics at Peking University. "Another could be that Xi Jinping senses he has secured his political authority, thanks to his anticorruption drive and assertion of control over the military, which gives him more space to maneuver on foreign policy." Still, neither side has made the kind of bold gestures that would be expected to precede a deeper rapprochement. Both are expanding military spending. Mr. Abe, who angered China by visiting a controversial Tokyo war shrine in December 2013, has continued to make offerings to the shrine on ceremonial occasions, although people close to the prime minister expect him to refrain from another visit. "It's hard to see either side making any major concessions. The relationship has been moved from the freezer to the refrigerator," said Yasuyuki Miyake, a professor of China studies at Kwansei Gakuin University in Japan. Mr. Abe's latest cabinet, named early this month, includes several ministers with conservative views, such as internal-affairs minister Sanae Takaichi, who said she would continue to visit the shrine during her term. Mr. Abe retained education minister Hakubun Shimomura, who has pushed for an end to what he describes as the overly apologetic view of history taught in Japanese schools. China reiterated Thursday that any formal talks between the two leaders would depend on Tokyo. "The key is that the Japanese side should show sincerity and take concrete actions to remove the political obstacles that stand in the way of the normal development of bilateral ties," said foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying. Christopher Hughes, professor of international relations at the London School of Economics, said Mr. Xi's standing could be undermined if he is perceived as reconciling with Japan in the absence of concessions. "In some ways, Mr. Abe's domestic position is more secure than Mr. Xi's," Mr. Hughes said. "China won't want to be seen as weak—they want to portray themselves as negotiating on their own terms, from a position of strength."
But if Shinzo Abe is gambling with the region’s security, he is at least playing the odds. He is calculating that Japan can pursue a more muscular foreign policy without triggering a catastrophic backlash from China, based on the numerous constraints that shape Chinese actions, as well as the interlocking structure of the globalized environment which the two countries co-inhabit. Specifically, there are seven reasons to think that war is a very unlikely prospect, even with a more hawkish prime minister running Japan: 1. Beijing’s nightmare scenario. China might well win a war against Japan, but defeat would also be a very real possibility. As China closes the book on its “century of humiliation” and looks ahead to prouder times, the prospect of a new, avoidable humiliation at the hands of its most bitter enemy is enough to persuade Beijing to do everything it can to prevent that outcome (the surest way being not to have a war at all). Certainly, China’s new leader, Xi Jinping, does not want to go down in history as the man who led China into a disastrous conflict with the Japanese. In that scenario, Xi would be doomed politically, and, as China’s angry nationalism turned inward, the Communist Party probably wouldn’t survive either. 2. Economic interdependence. Win or lose, a Sino-Japanese war would be disastrous for both participants. The flagging economy that Abe is trying to breathe life into with a $117 billion stimulus package would take a battering as the lucrative China market was closed off to Japanese business. China would suffer, too, as Japanese companies pulled out of a now-hostile market, depriving up to 5 million Chinese workers of their jobs, even as Xi Jinping looks to double per capita income by 2020. Panic in the globalized economy would further depress both economies, and potentially destroy the programs of both countries’ new leaders. 3. Question marks over the PLA’s operational effectiveness.The People’s Liberation Army is rapidly modernizing, but there are concerns about how effective it would prove if pressed into combat today – not least within China’s own military hierarchy. New Central Military Commission Vice-Chairman Xu Qiliang recently told the PLA Daily that too many PLA exercises are merely for show, and that new elite units had to be formed if China wanted to protect its interests. CMC Chairman Xi Jinping has also called on the PLA to improve its readiness for “real combat.” Other weaknesses within the PLA, such as endemic corruption, would similarly undermine the leadership’s confidence in committing it to a risky war with a peer adversary. 4. Unsettled politics. China’s civil and military leaderships remain in a state of flux, with the handover initiated in November not yet complete. As the new leaders find their feet and jockey for position amongst themselves, they will want to avoid big foreign-policy distractions – war with Japan and possibly the U.S. being the biggest of them all. 5. The unknown quantity of U.S. intervention. China has its hawks, such as Dai Xu, who think that the U.S. would never intervene in an Asian conflict on behalf of Japan or any other regional ally. But this view is far too casual. U.S. involvement is a real enough possibility to give China pause, should the chances of conflict increase. 6. China’s policy of avoiding military confrontation. China has always said that it favors peaceful solutions to disputes, and its actions have tended to bear this out. In particular, it continues to usually dispatch unarmed or only lightly armed law enforcement ships to maritime flashpoints, rather than naval ships.There have been calls for a more aggressive policy in the nationalist media, and from some military figures; but Beijing has not shown much sign of heeding them. The PLA Navy made a more active intervention in the dispute this week when one of its frigates trained its radar on a Japanese naval vessel. This was a dangerous and provocative act of escalation, but once again the Chinese action was kept within bounds that made violence unlikely (albeit, needlessly, more likely than before). 7. China’s socialization. China has spent too long telling the world that it poses no threat to peace to turn around and fulfill all the China-bashers’ prophecies. Already, China’s reputation in Southeast Asia has taken a hit over its handling of territorial disputes there. If it were cast as the guilty party in a conflict with Japan –which already has the sympathy of many East Asian countries where tensions China are concerned – China would see regional opinion harden against it further still. This is not what Beijing wants: It seeks to influence regional affairs diplomatically from within, and to realize “win-win” opportunities with its international partners.
Meanwhile, Abe is also pursuing diplomatic avenues. It was Abe who mended Japan’s ties with China after the Koizumi years, and he is now trying to reprise his role as peacemaker, having dispatched his coalition partner, Natsuo Yamaguchi, to Beijing reportedly to convey his desire for a new dialogue. It is hardly surprising, given his daunting domestic laundry list, that Xi Jinping should have responded encouragingly to the Japanese olive branch. In the end, Abe and Xi are balancing the same equation: They will not give ground on sovereignty issues, but they have no interest in a war – in fact, they must dread it. Even if a small skirmish between Chinese and Japanese ships or aircraft occurs, the leaders will not order additional forces to join the battle unless they are boxed in by a very specific set of circumstances that makes escalation the only face-saving option. The escalatory spiral into all-out war that some envisage once the first shot is fired is certainly not the likeliest outcome, as recurrent skirmishes elsewhere – such as in Kashmir, or along the Thai-Cambodian border – have demonstrated.
In order to secure a meeting with Chinese President Xi Jinping, Japanese Premier Shinzo Abe agreed to a significant concession in Tokyo’s ongoing dispute with China over the Senkaku Islands, according to Japanese media outlets. As Shannon noted earlier today on China Power, Japanese officials now expect there to be a brief meeting between Chinese President Xi Jinping and Japanese Premier Shinzo Abe during next month’s Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) meeting in Beijing. The meeting would be the first between the two heads of state since they took their current positions. It comes after a prolonged Japanese charm offensive towards China, which resulted in extensive behind-the-scenes negotiations aimed at securing a heads of state meeting at APEC. The meeting, which Japanese officials acknowledged would be more symbolic than substantive, did not come cheaply for Japan. Indeed, if Japanese media reports are accurate, Tokyo appears to have caved on the major issue that prevented a heads-of-state meeting to date. On Thursday, Mainichi reported that Japan made a three-prong proposal to China in order to secure the meeting between the two heads of states next month. According to the report, which cited “Japanese government sources,” Japan proposed that during his meeting with Xi, Abe would first reassert that the Senkaku Islands are an inherent part of Japanese territory, but then “acknowledge that China has a case as well” to the islands. He would then propose that China and Japan seek to settle the issue through mutual dialogue over time. None of this would be included in a joint statement or any other documents officially released after the summit meeting. Still, if the report is accurate, Abe’s acknowledgement that a territorial dispute exists and proposal to settle the issue through mutual dialogue represent huge concessions to long-standing Chinese demands. The Japanese government has always refused to acknowledge that a territorial dispute even exists with China over the Senkaku Islands, which Beijing refers to as the Diaoyu Islands. “There exists no issue of territorial sovereignty to be resolved concerning the Senkaku Islands,” Japan has said on numerous occasions. China’s main precondition for agreeing to a heads of state meeting between President Xi and Prime Minister Abe has long been Japan’s acknowledgement that the territorial dispute exists. As Kyodo reported in June 2013, “Even after the change of government last December with the inauguration of the administration of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, China has continued to call for Japan to acknowledge that a territorial dispute exists as a precondition for holding a summit.” That same report noted that Japan had refused to do this, and thus that a leadership summit appeared unlikely for the foreseeable future. The two sides also publicly fought over the issue during the UN General Assembly meeting in September of last year. First, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi said at a think tank speech before the UNGA opened that China was willing to reopen dialogue with Japan, but first “Japan needs to recognize that there is such a dispute. The whole world knows that there is a dispute.” Prime Minister Abe appeared to respond to Wang in a press conference following his appearance at the UN summit. “Senkaku is an inherent part of the territory of Japan in light of historical facts and based upon international law, and the islands are under the valid control of Japan,” Abe said at the press conference. While Tokyo would not escalate the situation and wanted to open dialogue with China to avoid an armed conflict, Abe insisted that “Japan would not make a concession on our territorial sovereignty.” Some in China are already taking the concession as a sign of Japanese weakness. Specifically, the Global Times quoted Yang Bojiang, director of Japanese studies at the China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations, as saying: “Abe is under economic pressure to resume talks with China and advance the bilateral relationship, so he has to show the world his willingness to talk.”
A “deep truth” column by in the August 15 on-line Nihon Keizai Shimbun focuses on the dramatic decrease in Chinese “intrusions” into waters around the disputed Senkaku/Diaoyu islands. Nikkei editorial board member Akita Hiroyuki cites Japanese government sources to reveal that during the first six months of 2014 40 Chinese vessels entered waters around Senkaku/Diaoyu claimed by Japan. This works out to 6.6 vessels a month. In the first six months of 2013 94 Chinese vessels had entered the waters, a monthly average of 15.6 vessels. Thus, this year’s “incursions” have fallen by half. Also the duration of the Chinese vessels’ presence in Japanese-claimed waters declined. Last year in was not uncommon for the vessels to remain for over four hours. Since this spring, two to three hours has been the rule. From the Japanese perspective, it has not been only the number and length of China’s “intrusions” that have diminished, certain “provocative” acts have ceased. Last year Chinese coast guard vessels were detaining Japanese fishing boats and threatening to prosecute their crews, while also performing course blocking maneuvers against Japanese patrol ships. Such Chinese actions have recently declined. “There is intelligence suggesting that the Chinese authorities have ordered an end to forced expulsion of Japanese fishing boats,” writes Akita.
The new U.S.-Japan Defense Guidelines will upgrade bilateral operational cooperation and enhance the alliance structure. The new Guidelines enable Japanese and U.S. forces to conduct effective combined operations defending each other’s units and assets in the high seas—even beyond Japanese territorial waters. The new Alliance Coordination Mechanism will endorse this upgraded operational cooperation. Under this new Mechanism, the Japan Self-Defense Force (JSDF) and U.S. military will share information and situational awareness from peacetime to gray-zone and full-fledged military contingencies, while coordinating bilateral responses. The Guidelines will have huge implications for U.S.-Japan cooperation in the maritime domain. For the last several years, China has been challenging Japanese territory and sovereignty in the East China Sea. China recognizes that the overall military balance still favors Japan and the United States, and therefore takes measures short of armed attack to avoid U.S. military intervention. The first responder to Chinese gray-zone challenges in the East China Sea is the Japan Coast Guard (JCG). By involving JCG in the Alliance Coordination Mechanism, the alliance can effectively respond to Chinese creeping coercion. The new Guidelines will also allow the JSDF and US forces to prepare flexible deterrent options (FDOs) for escalation control. By demonstrating its will and determination through the deployment of allied units, the alliance can dominate escalation. The new Guidelines will enhance overall deterrence too. An increasingly important aspect of alliance deterrence is its ability to respond to China’s precision strike capabilities. The new Guidelines refer to dispersion, hardening, and resiliency of existing facilities to deal with China’s ballistic missile threat vis-à-vis, for instance, Kadena Airbase in Okinawa. Even after a Chinese ballistic missile attack, the alliance will maintain counterattack capabilities using other military and commercial facilities, while rapidly recovering damaged ones. The new Guidelines also define the division of labor between the JSDF and U.S. military for island defense. This is to endorse US commitment to defend the Senkaku Islands and the entire Japanese southwestern island chain. The traditional alliance division of labor was spear and shield—U.S. forces provide offensive strike capabilities and JSDF provide defensive measures. In island defense, however, the JSDF takes the primary responsibility through the Dynamic Joint Defense Force, while the U.S. military plays a supporting role with strategic strike capabilities. Maritime security and the protection of freedom of navigation without geographical restriction is a core of the new Guidelines. The alliance will continue to be a major security provider for the Taiwan Strait. Given the ongoing Chinese land reclamation and nuclear submarine (SSBN) program in the South China Sea, the new Guidelines will enable Japan-U.S. cooperation for intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) in these troubled waters. Japanese ISR activities in the South China Sea will not only secure freedom of navigation but also maintain the credibility of the U.S. nuclear umbrella. The new Guidelines also assume bilateral cooperation for minesweeping and ship inspection in the international waters. The new Guidelines call for cooperation with third parties. The alliance can work more with Australia in the Pacific   and India in the Indian Ocean. The alliance can conduct more effective and efficient capacity building for countries like the Philippines and Vietnam, too. U.S.-Japan cooperation for the new Australian submarine program will enhance underwater superiority of the alliance in the Pacific. The Guidelines need to be endorsed by Japanese domestic security legislation reform. The ruling coalition of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and Komeito has already agreed on the content of the legislation, and they will pass it in the Diet by summer. The new security legislation will allow the JSDF to use force, only in a situation that threatens Japan’s national survival. But how that is defined remains to be seen— Komeito is still reluctant to regard a threat to Japanese sea lanes as a threat to national survival. Seventy years ago, Japan was defeated not by atomic bombing but by commercial raid. To make the new Guidelines work for maritime security, Japanese political leaders need to reach a consensus on the importance of sea lanes, and their role in national defense.
LONDON — In an effort to allay concerns in Washington about cuts in British military spending, an American official has joined a British review panel that was established to determine the future of Britain’s armed forces. Speaking to reporters in London on Thursday, Michael Fallon, the British defense secretary, said he had “deliberately invited and included a U.S. official” to join the review, adding that his government was “liaising very closely with the Department of Defense throughout.” No further details about the official were given. Mr. Fallon also emphasized other areas of cooperation with the United States, adding that a recent American airstrike in Libya targeting Mokhtar Belmokhtar, the mastermind of the 2013 attack at an Algerian gas plant, had been initiated from a British air base. “That’s how we cooperate,” Mr. Fallon said, adding that he rejected the idea that Britain was reducing its presence on the global stage.
WHEN THE RUSSIAN security firm Kaspersky Lab disclosed recently that it had been hacked, it noted that the attackers, believed to be from Israel, had been in its network since sometime last year. The company also said the attackers seemed intent on studying its antivirus software to find ways to subvert the software on customer machines and avoid detection. Now newly published documents released by Edward Snowden show that the NSA and its British counterpart, GCHQ, were years ahead of Israel and had engaged in a systematic campaign to target not only Kaspersky software but the software of other antivirus and security firms as far back as 2008. The documents, published today by The Intercept, don’t describe actual computer breaches against the security firms, but instead depict a systematic campaign to reverse-engineer their software in order to uncover vulnerabilities that could help the spy agencies subvert it. The British spy agency regarded the Kaspersky software in particular as a hindrance to its hacking operations and sought a way to neutralize it. “Personal security products such as the Russian anti-virus software Kaspersky continue to pose a challenge to GCHQ’s CNE [Computer Network Exploitation] capability,” reads one of the documents, “and SRE [software reverse-engineering] is essential in order to be able to exploit such software and to prevent detection of our activities.” An NSA slide describing “Project CAMBERDADA” lists at least 23 antivirus and security firms that were in that spy agency’s sights. They include the Finnish antivirus firm F-Secure, the Slovakian firm Eset, Avast software from the Czech Republic. and Bit-Defender from Romania. Notably missing from the list are the American anti-virus firms Symantec and McAfee as well as the UK-based firm Sophos. But antivirus wasn’t the only target of the two spy agencies. They also targeted their reverse-engineering skills against CheckPoint, an Israeli maker of firewall software, as well as commercial encryption programs and software underpinning the online bulletin boards of numerous companies. GCHQ, for example, reverse-engineered both the CrypticDisk program made by Exlade and the eDataSecurity system from Acer. The spy agency also targeted web forum systems like vBulletin and Invision Power Board—used by Sony Pictures, Electronic Arts, NBC Universal and others—as well as CPanel, a software used by GoDaddy for configuring its servers, and PostfixAdmin, for managing the Postfix email server software But that’s not all. GCHQ reverse-engineerred Cisco routers, too, which allowed the agency’s spies to access “almost any user of the internet” inside Pakistan and “to re-route selective traffic” straight into the mouth of GCHQ’s collection systems. Legal Cover To obtain legal cover for all this activity, the GCHQ sought and obtained warrants granting permission to reverse-engineer the software. The warrants, issued by the UK Foreign Secretary under the UK’s Intelligence Services Act 1994 Section 5, gave the spy agency permission to modify commercially available software to “enable intercept, decryption and other related tasks.” One of the warrants, used to reverse-engineer Kaspersky software, was valid for six months from July 7, 2008 to January 7, 2009, after which the agency sought to renew it. Without a warrant, the agency feared it would be in breach of Kaspersky’s customer licensing agreement or violate its copyright. Software makers often embed protection mechanisms in their programs to thwart reverse-engineering and copying of their programs and include language in their licensing agreements prohibiting such activity. “Reverse engineering of commercial products needs to be warranted in order to be lawful,” one GCHQ agency memo noted. “There is a risk that in the unlikely event of a challenge by the copyright owner or licensor, the courts would, in the absence of a legal authorisation, hold that such activity was unlawful[…]” But, according to The Intercept, the warrant itself was on shaky legal grounds since the Intelligence Services Act, Section 5, references interference with property and “wireless telegraphy” by intelligence agencies but does not mention intellectual property. Its use to authorize copyright infringement is novel, to say the least. Target Kaspersky Earlier this month, Kaspersky disclosed that it had been hacked last year by members of the infamous Stuxnet and Duqu gangs. The intruders remained entrenched in the security firm’s networks for months siphoning intelligence about nation-state attacks the company is investigating and studying how Kaspersky’s detection software works so they could devise ways to subvert it on customer machines. Kaspersky claims to have more than 400 million users worldwide. The attackers were also interested in the Kaspersky Security Network, an opt-in system that gathers data from customer machines about new threats infecting them. Any time Kaspersky’s antivirus and other security software detects a new infection on the machine of a customer who has opted-in to the program, or encounters a suspicious file, data gets sent automatically to Kaspersky’s servers so the company’s algorithms and analysts can study and track emerging and existing threats. The company uses KSN to create maps outlining the geographical reach of various threats and is an important tool for tracking nation-state attacks from agencies like the NSA and GCHQ. The newly published NSA documents describe a different method for gaining intelligence about Kaspersky and its customers. The spy agencies apparently monitored email traffic coming to Kaspersky and other antivirus companies from their customers in order to uncover reports about new malware attacks. The spy agencies would then examine the malware sent by these customers and determine if it had use to them. A 2010 presentation indicates that the NSA’s signals intelligence would pick out for analysis about ten new “potentially malicious files per day” out of the hundreds of thousands that came into Kaspersky’s network each day. NSA analysts would then check the malicious files against Kaspersky’s antivirus software to make sure they weren’t being detected by the software yet, then the NSA’s hackers would “repurpose the malware” for their own use, checking periodically to determine when Kaspersky had added detection for the malware to its anti-virus software.
But again, beyond the fact that Britain’s economic power would only decline about 10 percent if Scotland did someday secede, London’s sway in overall geostrategic terms should not be exaggerated. British defense spending may be marginally the greatest of any European country, at about $60 billion a year in U.S. dollars. But it is just one of five key U.S. allies — including Japan, Germany, France and Saudi Arabia — that spend in the range of $40 billion to $80 billion annually. Nations like South Korea, Italy, Israel, Brazil and Australia occupy a third tier, in the range of $20 billion to $35 billion each. Closer to home, Canada and Colombia are not far behind. India, not quite an ally but increasingly an important partner, clocks in at around $50 billion a year. (By comparison, China spends around $150 billion and Russia about half that.) Of course, dollars don’t tell it all. Besides the United States, Britain remains the only country able to project on short notice nearly a division of ground power to distant theaters. In light of budget pressures, though, it is cutting its army, which will wind up less than half the size of the U.S. Marine Corps. With a population almost a fifth of the United States’, Britain will now have only about one-tenth as much ground power. Yet this would still leave London with the world’s second-most-powerful deployable ground force. For most key regions, however, Britain is no longer the predominant U.S. ally, in either military or diplomatic terms. Japan and South Korea, followed by Australia, matter more in terms of the Korean peninsula and Western Pacific more generally. Saudi Arabia and Turkey matter at least as much in the Middle East. Colombia is probably the key player in the Central America and Caribbean region. Germany has a lead role in dealing with Russian President Vladimir Putin. Looking back in history, moreover, the U.S.-Britain collaboration is rooted in a shared history, values and sense of purpose. Yet, it has its limits. The 2003 invasion of Iraq, for example, was hardly a popular global cause just because British Prime Minister Tony Blair gave President George W. Bush strategic cover. The partnership has been, for some years, a notch below the unique special relationship it is often depicted as. Not because it is unimportant, but because other relationships now matter just as much. It is still one of Washington’s key five or six strategic partnerships — but not necessarily more than that. Most of all, it is dubious that the strength and value of the relationship would suffer greatly even if Scotland were to indulge its inner Braveheart and go its own way.
Bilateral Economic Cooperation The Obama Administration has engaged in bilateral efforts with Mexico, and also with Canada, to address issues related to the U.S.-Mexico border, enhance economic competitiveness, increase regulatory cooperation, and pursue energy integration. High Level Economic Dialogue (HLED) On September 20, 2013, the United States and Mexico launched the High Economic Dialogue (HLED), co-chaired by the U.S. Department of State, Department of Commerce, the Office of the United States Trade Representative, and their Mexican counterparts. 13 The purpose of the initiative is to advance U.S.-Mexico economic and commercial priorities that are central to promoting mutual economic growth, job creation, and global competitiveness. The HLED is organized around three broad pillars, including: 1) promoting competitiveness and connectivity; 2) fostering economic growth, productivity, and innovation; and 3) partnering for regional and global leadership. The HLED’s major goals are to promote competitiveness in specific sectors such as transportation, telecommunications, and energy; to explore ways to promote entrepreneurship and encourage the development of human capital; and to facilitate greater alignment on issues of shared concern in both regional and international initiatives, especially in trade negotiation. Some of the initial steps toward accomplishing such goals have included: continuing the work of the Mexico-U.S. Entrepreneurship and Innovation Council; collaborating on organizing an information and communications technology road show, regulatory workshop series, and broadband innovation information exchanges; developing an agenda for cooperation on intelligent transportation and freight systems; making more efficient use of the North American Development Bank and the Border Environment Cooperation Commission; and pursue joint investment initiatives.14 Mexican President Enrique Pena Nieto’s approach to combating Mexican drug cartels has been a much-discussed topic since well before he was elected. Indeed, in June 2011 — more than a year before the July 2012 Mexican presidential election — I wrote an analysis discussing rumors that, if elected, Pena Nieto was going to attempt to reach some sort of accommodation with Mexico’s drug cartels in order to bring down the level of violence. Such rumors were certainly understandable, given the arrangement that had existed for many years between some senior members of Pena Nieto’s Institutional Revolutionary Party and some powerful cartel figures during the Institutional Revolutionary Party’s long reign in Mexico prior to the election of Vicente Fox of the National Action Party in 2000. However, as we argued in 2011 and repeated in March 2013, much has changed in Mexico since 2000, and the new reality in Mexico means that it would be impossible for the Pena Nieto administration to reach any sort of deal with the cartels even if it made an attempt. But the rumors of the Pena Nieto government reaching an accommodation with some cartel figures such as Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman Loera have persisted, even as the Mexican government arrests key operatives in Guzman’s network, such as Ines Coronel Barreras, Guzman’s father-in-law, who was arrested May 1 in Agua Prieta, Mexico. Indeed, on April 27, Washington Post reporter Dana Priest published a detailed article outlining how U.S. authorities were fearful that the Mexican government was restructuring its security relationship with the U.S. government so that it could more easily reach an unofficial truce with cartel leaders. Yet four days later, Coronel — a significant cartel figure — was arrested in a joint operation between the Mexicans and Americans.
While continued American predominance cannot, at present, be justified on the basis of a Chinese drive for predominance, what of the widespread argument in U.S. policy circles that such predominance is necessary regardless of Chinese intentions, as the best possible means of ensuring regional (and global) order? While deeply rooted in both American exceptionalism and beliefs about the benefits of hegemonic power in the international order, the notion that unequivocal U.S. predominance in the Western Pacific constitutes the only basis for long-term stability and prosperity across the Asia-Pacific is a dangerous, increasingly obsolete concept, for several reasons.
Second, and equally important, it is far from clear that American military predominance in the Asia-Pacific region can be sustained on a consistent basis, just as it is virtually impossible that China could establish its own predominance in the region. Two Carnegie reports on the long-term security environment in Asia, China’s Military and the U.S.-Japan Alliance in 2030 and Conflict and Cooperation in the Asia-Pacific Region,2 concluded that, while the United States will remain the strongest military power on a global level indefinitely, Washington will almost certainly confront increasingly severe, economically induced defense spending limitations that will constrain efforts to decisively keep well ahead of a growing Chinese military and paramilitary presence within approximately 1,500 nautical miles of the Chinese coastline, that is, the area covered by the so-called first and second island chains. This will occur despite Washington’s repeated assertion that the rebalance to Asia will sustain America’s predominant position in the region. Moreover, such largely economic constraints will almost certainly be magnified by the persistence of tensions and conflicts in other parts of the world, such as the Middle East and Central Europe. These events are likely to complicate any U.S. effort to shift forces (and resources) to the Asia-Pacific.
The limits on U.S. maritime predominance do not mean that China will eventually grow into the position of Asia’s next military hegemon, however. The above-mentioned Carnegie reports also concluded that American military power in Asia will remain very strong under all but the most unlikely, worst-case scenarios involving a U.S. withdrawal from the region. While China’s regional military capabilities will continue to grow significantly in key areas such as submarines and surface warships, ballistic and cruise missiles, offensive aircraft, air defense, and joint warfare, they will not provide an unambiguous level of superiority over U.S. forces in the Western Pacific, and certainly not in any other region. Therefore, any eventual Chinese attempt to establish predominance in Asia would almost inevitably fail, and not only because of U.S. capabilities and resolve, but also because such an effort would drive regional states much closer to the United States. The result would be either a cold or a hot war in Asia, with intensifying polarization, arms races, and an increased likelihood of crises and conflicts.
The first month of 2015 has witnessed a slow thawing of China-Japan relations. Following up their Beijing summit meeting in November of 2014, the two Asian giants resumed two maritime security talks in January of 2015 – one between their two defense departments, and the other working level diplomatic talks between the governments. So far there is no sign that China and Japan will quickly progress with a substantive deal, given their long-standing mutual suspicions, friction, and arguments. The resumption of the talks, however, represents the return of diplomatic pragmatism in dealing with their protracted disagreements over the East China Sea. The defense officers meeting, which commenced on January 12-13, is a trial balloon to see if the militaries can repair their ties since contact was fully broken in June 2012. Participants on both sides are low-level officers responsible for military-to-military relations. The media has reported that China and Japan are close to a deal on establishing an at-sea hotline, but this is not a breakthrough. As early as 2010, maritime tensions between Beijing and Tokyo arose from the detention of a Chinese trawler captain and compelled both sides to seek a maritime communication mechanism to prevention conflict escalation. By June 2012, both militaries were close to a deal to build an emergency communication mechanism. Unfortunately, after the Noda Administration’s decision to “nationalize” the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands, and China’s intrusion into the islands’ territorial waters with surveillance boats, progress on the deal ceased entirely. An additional round of “working level talks” by senior officials from both countries, also took place at Yokohama on January 22-23, however, and this channel is more intriguing. The talks, composed of multiple departmental officials from both sides, are aimed at addressing China-Japan animosity in the East China Sea, and strive to mitigate their maritime disputes. If the talks continue, they will be a promising pathway to rebuilding the “consensual process” in the East China Sea contestation. Beijing and Tokyo have distance between them on numerous issues, including the sovereignty dispute over the Diaoyu/Senkaku islands, EEZ delimitations, specification of joint development zones, fishing administration, and military surveillance in unclarified EEZ areas. The worst part of the China-Japan contest is their overlapping Air Defense Identity Zones (ADIZ). Japan has condemned Beijing for being unilateral and provocative in its first ADIZ announcement in the East China Sea in November, 2013. Obviously, Beijing’s decision to establish an ADIZ that covers disputed Diaoyu/Senkaku air space is a way to forcefully escalate pressure vis-à-vis Japan in return for Tokyo’s consistent refusal to admit the existence of a maritime territorial dispute between two countries, which in turn means the issue cannot be negotiated. In the eyes of the Japanese, on contrary, China’s ADIZ decision is a new indicator of its coercive intention. Resumption of the two sets of talks is a positive step. Political contacts at different levels of government may begin to warm again, and channels of political communication can accordingly re-open. Last week, a governor-level Chinese official visited Japan, another signal of political thawing. And despite its shortness, rituality, and rigidity, the Xi -Abe summit meeting in Beijing in November, confirmed the resilience of China-Japan relations. It remains quite unrealistic to assume, however, that China and Japan will firmly and explicitly improve their relations. Maritime security talks may not achieve an obvious breakthrough. There are several reasons why this is the case.
However, if we look at the practical significance of the remarks, there are several limiting factors. The interests at stake in the South China Sea are not core national interests for the United States. Meanwhile, the U.S.-Philippine alliance is not as important as the U.S.-Japan alliance, and U.S. ties with other ASEAN countries are even weaker. Given U.S.-China mutual economic dependence and China’s comprehensive national strength, the United States is unlikely to go so far as having a military confrontation with China over the South China Sea. Barack Obama, the ‘peace president’ who withdrew the U.S. military from Iraq and Afghanistan, is even less likely to fight with China for the South China Sea. As for the U.S. interests in the region, Washington is surely aware that China has not affected the freedom of commercial navigation in these waters so far. And as I noted in my earlier piece, Beijing is developing its stance and could eventually recognize the legality of military activities in another country’s EEZ (see, for example, the China-Russia joint military exercise in the Mediterranean). Yet when it comes to China’s large-scale land reclamation in the Spratly Islands (and on Woody Island in the Paracel Islands), Washington worries that Beijing will conduct a series of activities to strengthen its claims on the South China Sea, such as establishing an air defense identification zone (ADIZ) or advocating that others respect a 200-nautical mile (370 km) EEZ from its islands. Meanwhile, the 2014 oil rig incident taught Washington that ASEAN claimants and even ASEAN as a whole could hardly play any effective role in dealing with China’s land reclamation. Hence, the U.S. has no better choice than to become directly involved in this issue. At the beginning, the United States tried to stop China through private diplomatic mediation, yet it soon realized that this approach was not effective in persuading China. So Washington started to tackle the issue in a more aggressive way, such as encouraging India, Japan, ASEAN, the G7, and the European Union to pressure Beijing internationally. Domestically, U.S. officials from different departments and different levels have opposed China’s ‘changing the status quo’ in this area. Since 2015, Washington has increased its pressure on China. It sent the USS Fort Worth, a littoral combat ship, to sail in waters near the Spratly area controlled by Vietnam in early May. U.S. official are also considering sending naval and air patrols within 12 nautical miles of the Spratly Islands controlled by China. Washington has recognized that it could hardly stop China’s construction in Spratly Islands. Therefore, it has opted to portray Beijing as a challenger to the status quo, at the same time moving to prevent China from establishing a South China Sea ADIZ and an EEZ of 200 nautical miles around its artificial islands. This was the logic behind the U.S. sending a P-8A surveillance plane with reporters on board to approach three artificial island built by China. China issued eight warnings to the plane; the U.S. responded by saying the plane was flying through international airspace. Afterwards, U.S. Defense Department spokesman, Army Col. Steve Warren, said there could be a potential “freedom of navigation” exercise within 12 nautical miles of the artificial islands. If this approach were adopted, it would back China into a corner; hence it’s a unlikely the Obama administration will make that move. As the U.S. involvement in the South China Sea becomes more aggressive and high-profile, the dynamic relationship between China and the United States comes to affect other layers of the dispute (for example, relations between China and ASEAN claimants or China and ASEAN in general). To some extent, the South China Sea dispute has developed into a balance of power tug-of-war between the U.S. and China, yet both sides will not take the risk of military confrontation. As Foreign Minister Wang Yi put it in a recent meeting with U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry, “as for the differences, our attitude is it is okay to have differences as long as we could avoid misunderstanding, and even more importantly, avoid miscalculation.” For its part, China is determined to build artificial islands and several airstrips in the Spratlys, which I argue would help promote the resolution of SCS disputes. But it’s worth noting that if China establishes an ADIZ and advocates a 200 nautical miles EEZ (as the U.S. fears), it would push ASEAN claimants and even non-claimants to stand by the United States. Obviously, the potential consequences contradict with China’s “One Belt, One Road” strategy. In February 2014, in response to reports by Japan’s Asahi Shimbun that a South China Sea ADIZ was imminent, China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs hinted that China would not necessarily impose an ADIZ. “The Chinese side has yet to feel any air security threat from the ASEAN countries and is optimistic about its relations with the neighboring countries and the general situation in the South China Sea region,” a spokesperson said. Since the “Belt and Road” is Beijing’s primary strategic agenda for the coming years, it is crucial for China to strengthen its economic relationship with ASEAN on the one hand while reducing ASEAN claimants’ security concerns on the other hand. As a result, it should accelerate the adjustment of its South China Sea policy; clarify China’s stand on the issue, and propose China’s blueprint for resolving the disputes. The South China Sea dispute has developed a seasonal pattern, where the first half of the year is focused on conflicts, and the second half tends to emphasize cooperation. Considering its timing at the peak of ‘conflict season,’ the Shangri-La Dialogue serves as a hot spot. Since 2012, the Shangri-La Dialogue has become a platform for the U.S. and China to tussle on the South China Sea, with the U.S. being proactive and China reactive. (Incidentally, this partly explains why China is upgrading Xiangshan Forum as an alternative dialogue platform). This year was no exception, as the U.S. worked hard to draw the world’s attention to the Shangri-La Dialogue this year. But audiences should be aware that aggressive statements at the Shangri-La Dialogue are not totally representative of U.S.-China relations. After all, these statements are made by military rather than political elites. Cooperation will be the key when the U.S. and China have their Strategic and Economic Dialogue in late June, with the ASEAN Regional Forum and other meetings following later this summer.
No sane Chinese or American official wants a major war between the two countries. Nor would anyone in a responsible position on the U.S. side welcome even a limited military conflict with China, for fear of miscalculation, escalation, and unintended consequences, including the significant endangerment of economic relations. American restraint is demonstrable in the South China Sea (SCS) but it has also characterized the U.S. response to China-initiated situations in the East China Sea and across the Taiwan Strait. That prudent approach, however, is not sufficiently shared by Chinese government and military leaders. Some seem willing to push the envelope to see just how much aggressive behavior Washington will tolerate in the region. They appear prepared to risk a direct clash at sea or in the air and expect the U.S. to make the necessary efforts to avoid it – for instance, to back away from exercising full navigational and overflight rights. Beijing’s belief in its new military prowess and in America’s failing will and capabilities emboldens Chinese leaders to persist in their defiance even if planes or ships collide, and potentially, if shots are actually fired. Chinese officials are convinced that Washington fears escalation more than they do and that it will accept a compromise resolution rather than take U.S. resistance to the next level. But if Washington’s present grasping for an SCS off-ramp leaves China in even a marginally better position than the status quo ante, it will be seen – not just in Beijing – as vindication of its more aggressive actions and evidence of faltering U.S. resolve. America, and countries that depend on its security guarantees, will have been taught a lesson. To pursue its regional and global ambitions, China will no longer feel compelled to heed Deng Xiaoping’s caution to “bide our time, hide our capabilities.” The blow to U.S. prestige and security credibility will exceed that suffered after the Scarborough Shoal incident in 2012. Washington helped mediate a diplomatic solution to the tense China-Philippines standoff, but then did nothing when China violated the agreement and effectively seized the disputed reef from America’s treaty ally. Washington rationalized that it had no interest in the actual outcome of the sovereignty dispute as long as it was determined peacefully and bilaterally. Yet, even that limited U.S. interest was defeated by China’s unilateral quasi-military action, and Washington accepted it rather than confront Beijing. In the unfolding crisis in the SCS, however, the U.S. no longer has the option to look away. As Defense Secretary Ashton Carter declared at the Shangri-La defense ministers’ meeting last week, the United States has a direct and enduring interest in freedom of navigation and overflight in all international waters and airspace. Beyond self-interest, America has kept the maritime and aviation public commons open to all nations for more than seven decades. Allowing China unilaterally to carve out a gigantic exception to Washington’s global role in the vital SCS shipping lanes would constitute an incalculable diminution of U.S. power and prestige. If American will not uphold its own proclaimed navigational and overflight rights, will Japan believe it would be more willing to risk conflict with China by defending the “pile of rocks” known as the Senkakus? The way out of this fraught dilemma is to follow the frequent admonition of Deng, Mao Zedong, and other Chinese leaders: “It is up to the one who tied the knot to untie it.” That would clearly be China in this case. Yes, it will mean an inevitable loss of face for a government that is adept at playing the face card to avoid accountability for its own reckless actions. Better from Beijing’s viewpoint to compel others to manage some tactical retreat to rescue China’s ill-placed and self-serving pride. But anything less than implementation of Washington’s declaration of total and free access to the waters and airspace of the South China Sea will be understood in Beijing and capitals around the world as a further erosion of U.S. credibility. And credibility is the very linchpin of America’s pivot to Asia. Loss of our most valuable asset in confronting the increasingly non-peaceful rise of China will surely unbalance the rebalance. For regional and international security, it is important that at the denouement of the current crisis, China will have taught itself a corrective lesson.
If the unthinkable happens, and the dispute in the East China Sea between Japan and China over the Senkaku islands (called the Diaoyu islands by the Chinese) escalates into a military conflict, will the U.S. military really come to the aid of Japan? This is certainly the implied position of the Obama administration, but would it be able to follow through on this commitment? If not, what impact will this have on future relations with Japan and in Asia? These are very important questions, yet no one is asking them; this is because no one thinks they need to be asked. On the surface, this is true. In late April 2014, President Obama twice stated that the disputed islands are, in his words, “administered by Japan and therefore fall within the scope of Article 5 of the U.S.-Japan Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security.” The president’s statement affirmed a position that had already been articulated by former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, current Secretary of State John Kerry, and former Defense Secretary Leon Panetta. It was, nevertheless, very well received in Japan, with one of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s advisors declaring it “the most reassuring statement that the nation has ever heard from the U.S.“ At the same time China has been cleverly taking actions, such as setting up an Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ) in area, which might call into question Japan’s administrative control over the Senkaku. So far, this has not altered the position of the Obama administration. Nor has it influenced Congress, which added a resolution to the 2013 National Defense Authorization Act stating “the unilateral action of a third party will not affect the United States’ acknowledgment of the administration of Japan over the Senkaku Islands.” This latter resolution is significant because, in the end, Congress may be the most important, and most vulnerable, institution when it comes to defending Japan. To understand why, it is helpful to look at the actual text of the U.S.-Japan treaty According to Article 5 of the treaty, each country is obligated “to meet common danger in accordance with its constitutional provisions and processes” (my emphasis). Lest one think that that this language was intended only to acknowledge Japan’s constitutional restrictions, a similar reference to constitutional demands is common in joint security arrangements entered into by the U.S. It is found, for example, in the NATO and SEATO treaties. According to the Congressional Research Service, the language was intended “to satisfy congressional concerns that the agreements could be interpreted as sanctioning the President to take military action in defense of treaty parties without additional congressional authorization.” This understanding is confirmed by 1973 The War Powers Resolution, which specifically states that presidential authority to unilaterally send troops into harm’s way shall not be inferred “from any treaty heretofore or hereafter ratified unless such treaty is implemented by legislation specifically authorizing the introduction of United States Armed Forces into hostilities.” There is, of course, an ongoing legal controversy in the U.S. over the extent of war powers given to the president as commander and chief of the military. Obama’s position on this matter is far from clear. In response to a question from the Boston Globe back in 2008, candidate Obama explained “the President does not have power under the Constitution to unilaterally authorize a military attack in a situation that does not involve stopping an actual or imminent threat to the nation.” In Libya in 2011, however, President Obama acted very differently, using American airpower to enforce a no-fly zone without seeking Congressional authorization. In Syria in 2013, however, the President refused to act without first consulting with the Congress. David Rothkopf wrote in Foreign Policy magazine that by going to Congress Obama had now made it “highly unlikely that at any time during the remainder of his term will he be able to initiate military action without seeking congressional approval.” If this is correct, then in the event of a battle in the East China Sea, Obama’s first reaction may not be to provide immediate military assistance. Instead, the president will request an authorization from Congress. Will this authorization be forthcoming? Based on the prior resolution, the answer appears to be yes. It is useful to recall that, at first, it seemed likely that Congress would support Obama’s call to use force in Syria. After all, both Obama and Republican House Speaker John Boehner supported this action. It was only after Congress and the public began paying attention to what was actually happening in Syria that it became clear that the votes were not there. Of course one cannot directly compare Syria and Japan. In Syria, the U.S. was not sure whether it had friends on either side of the conflict. More importantly, no treaty obligations were involved. Still, as it was with in Syria, the U.S. public knows very little about the islands that are the subject of so much debate between Japan and China. In the event that open hostilities break out over the islands, this will quickly change. How will constituent phone calls and e-mails trend when voters learn that the U.S. government’s position is that it takes no position on which country has the more valid claim to the islands? Will the public support risking World War III (that is undoubtedly how it will be portrayed by those opposing action) to defend territory whose ultimate owner, according to the U.S. government, is in dispute? These questions should be bothering not only Japan’s friends in Washington, but also her leaders in Nagatachō. The Obama administration’s persistent assurances about section 5 coverage, insofar as they ignore the role of Congress, may be providing Japan with a false sense of security. At the same time, the continued insistence that the U.S. is neutral with regard to sovereignty over the islands has provided China with a valuable argument that it can exploit to influence U.S. public opinion. It may well be that China’s ultimate goal is not only to possess the islands, but more importantly to weaken the relationship between the U.S. and Japan. In the end, Obama and his advisors need to remember two things. First, international relations is as much about anticipating threats as it is with dealing with problems as they emerge. Second, even in the area of international relations, Congress matters. This may nowhere be truer than in the East China Sea.
HONG KONG (MarketWatch) — Chinese leaders have been quick to put on a brave face after the ignominy of missing their economic-growth targets for first time since 1998. But while Premier Li Keqiang was telling global leaders in Davos not to worry about the economy, back at home the head of the country’s statistics bureau was rejecting claims China was already the world’s biggest economy.
China's military buildup, along with an aggressive foreign policy, has inspired a fair amount of alarm in the West. Some American policymakers consider Beijing to be Washington's only "near-peer competitor" — in other words, the only country with the military might to actually beat the U.S. military in certain circumstances.
At the same time, China is remarkably lacking in real, dependable allies. In the Pacific alone, the United States can count Japan, Taiwan, Australia, South Korea, New Zealand, and The Philippines as close allies — and maintains cordial relations with others including Malaysia, Vietnam, and Indonesia.
IQALUIT, Canada — The United States, Russia and other Arctic countries looked past Ukraine’s civil war and other tensions Friday, vowing to cooperate on preventing oil spills near the North Pole and combating climate change in a region warming faster than any other. Assuming the chair of the eight-nation Arctic Council, U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry said nations needed to significantly reduce emissions of black carbon and methane, short-lived greenhouse gases that are particularly potent sources of the Arctic’s warming. He said firm reduction goals would be set at the next meeting of ministers in 2017 in Alaska. “These pollutants are a threat to everybody,” Kerry said. The announcement, while modest, added to the Obama administration’s expanding environmental agenda over its final years, which already includes cutting pollutants from U.S. power plants and agreeing last year with China to lower carbon emissions. The U.S. and other governments will take another stab at a comprehensive climate change strategy later this year in Paris. The Arctic’s rising sea levels could have drastic effects around the world, changing coastlines and inundating small islands, and potentially hitting low-lying areas from Bangladesh to Florida the hardest. While Kerry and other delegates noted the vast opportunities that come with receding icecaps, they all spoke of the need for clean and sustainable development that serves the interests of the region’s inhabitants. Not all was rosy at this biennial gathering of a body that prides itself in avoiding political controversy to focus on preventing ecological, humanitarian and even military crises as the warming Arctic offers new shipping routes, fishing grounds and oil and gas drilling opportunities. On the eve of Friday’s gathering, Canada’s environment minister, Leona Aglukkaq, met with her Russian counterpart, Sergei Donskoi, and voiced displeasure with Moscow’s ongoing military activity in neighboring Ukraine. Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov didn’t attend the meeting, citing a prior commitment — an absence lamented publicly by one Alaskan Native representative. “It is important that we speak openly about the tensions between Russia and the West,” Michael Stickman said. But Kerry and Lavrov spoke by telephone Wednesday on the Arctic Council and other matters. Addressing Ukraine, the top American diplomat pressed Russia to remove its forces from the east of the country amid American claims that Russia is upping deliveries of heavy weaponry and training to Ukrainian separatists. “I challenged him,” Kerry told a news conference after the Arctic meeting Friday, saying the pressure for a Russian withdrawal must be maintained. Russia says it has no troops in Ukraine, but the U.S., Ukraine and European governments say the evidence over a year of fighting is overwhelming. The State Department has even referred recently to the rebels as “combined Russian-separatist” forces. Concerns with Russia’s motives encompass the Arctic, too, an area that holds trillions of dollars’ worth of oil and gas reserves and which Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin recently termed “Russia’s Mecca.” Just last month, Russia launched military maneuvers with tens of thousands of servicemen, dozens of ships and submarines, and more than 100 aircraft to check the nation’s readiness to protect its northern frontier. As the planet warms and opens up new chances to tap the Arctic’s riches, many have warned of a new battleground for resources emerging in the 21st century. Still, ministers from Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden and the U.S. stressed the positives as they met in the northern Canadian town of Iqaluit beside a frozen Frobisher Bay. “It is in no one’s interests to let problems elsewhere impact cooperation in the Arctic,” said Erkki Tuomioja, Finland’s foreign minister. “There is no room here for confrontation or fear-mongering,” Russia’s Donskoi said. His government hailed a plan to prevent an oil disaster in the Arctic Sea, the cleanup of which would be a logistical nightmare. And the United States, which sets the Council’s agenda for the next two years, presented an agreement by members to address black carbon, or soot, which is emitted by wood-burning cookstoves and diesel fuels. Strategies for doing so include reducing gas flaring during oil exploration.
Russia does not seek the role of a regional or global hegemony, but will defend its core values and interests, Russian President Vladimir Putin said. All attempts to impose on other nations have failed, he added. The Russian leader gave an assurance that Russia wants to respect the sovereignty and stability of other countries, as he was addressing the Federal Assembly, the collective of the two houses of the Russian parliament. “We will seek leadership by defending international law, advocating respect for national sovereignty, independence and the uniqueness of peoples,” Putin said. “We have always been proud of our country, but we do not aspire to the title of superpower, which is understood to be pretense for global or regional hegemony. We do not impinge on anyone’s interests, do not impose our patronage, do not attempt to lecture anyone on how they should live,” he added. Putin did not directly mention the United States in his speech, but the reference to Washington’s military actions in countries like Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya was hard to overlook. Those and less direct interventions, like the support of the rebel forces in Syria, have led to regress for the respective nations, Putin stated. On the other hand Russia’s approach, which rejects the use of force and promotes political dialogue and compromise, have been fruitful in both Syria and Iran, the Russian president said.
Russian president Vladimir Putin may be assuring the world that he is working to secure peace in Ukraine and that it is “unlikely” he will wage war with the country, but events on the ground tell the real story. Kremlin-backed rebels ignored a ceasefire, continuing their fight with the Ukrainian army, and Russia refuses to stop carrying out snap military exercises on its territory. And this is making Russia’s western neighbors nervous. Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia—all former Soviet republics and NATO members—are adopting new security measures, anxious about Putin’s next move. Lithuania’s State Defense Council, which includes the country’s highest officials, said Tuesday it would temporarily re-introduce military conscription. In 2008, Lithuania suspended the draft, moving toward a professional force. But times are changing, and men between the ages of 19 and 26 will have to serve, bolstering the 15,000-strong Lithuanian army by between 3,000 and 3,500 men a year. “Under new geopolitical circumstances, the army must be properly prepared for the country’s armed defense even in times of peace,” said the country’s president Dalia Grybauskaite. The bill still has to be approved by the Lithuanian parliament. All three Baltic states are significantly increasing their military spending. Latvia announced new recruitment efforts, and Estonia finalized the biggest military deal (paywall) in its history in December, buying 44 combat vehicles and six tanks from the Netherlands, totaling 138 million euro. But the Baltics’ higher defense shopping bill—1.2 billion euro—is nothing more than a blip compared to Russia’s defense spending, which amounted to 60 billion euro in 2014. Poland, which also borders Russia, and is far bigger than the Baltics, announced earlier this month a long shopping list of its own, allocating 33.6 billion euro over a decade on a military upgrade.
"The Arctic shouldn’t be dragged into the rhetoric of militarization,” the Russian official said during a Q & A at the Seliger youth forum in central Russia. “There are accusations flying about that we are trying to make a land-grab during a latter-day gold rush. This is nonsense. We don’t want the Arctic to become an arena of conflict.” Lavrov’s answer was a response to comments attributed to Canada’s foreign minister John Baird, who told Denmark’s Berlingske newspaper earlier this week that Ottawa was “determined to promote and defend the sovereignty of Canada in the Arctic” in the face of the Russian threat, manifested in the reactivation of a Soviet-era base off its north-eastern coast, and fly-bys by Russian aircraft. “Baird’s press service has tried to say that his comments were lost in translation and misunderstood. But I do not think this is the case – he has a reputation for such flourishes,” said Lavrov. The veteran diplomat suggested that the Arctic Council – which includes Russia, Canada, the US, Denmark, and Norway, the five Polar Circle countries – should take the lead role in establishing the framework for the development of the region. "This is the legitimate format, which allows the five countries to establish their rules for interaction in the region.” The territories beyond the Polar Circle are thought to contain 15 percent of the world’s oil, and 30 percent of its gas, according to US Geological Survey research. "When we get together in the framework of this forum, no one ever mentions any conflicts and confrontations. Everyone is interested in preserving cooperation and international law as the basic principles for exploration and development of the region," emphasized Lavrov. Canada boycotted the Moscow meeting of the Council this April, in protest against events leading to the secession of Crimea from Ukraine. The two countries, which already have the largest slice of the Arctic, are in the process of lodging applications to the UN that would extend their 200 mile nautical border further, if they manage to definitively prove that parts of the Arctic are extensions of their own continents, covered only by a shallow mass of water. Canada submitted an initial claim late last year, while Russia, which first laid claim to the land near the North Pole in 2001, will hand in a beefed up application next year. “The formalization of our rights granted by the Russian continental Arctic shelf is nearing completion. This will be a long procedure but we're confident we have all the legal grounds for formalizing our rights to the entire continental shelf in the Arctic Ocean,” said Lavrov. The Russian diplomat also attempted to assuage concerns that the ecologically unique territory will be at the mercy of oil-producing countries, as all five nations have extraction projects in the region at various stages of completion. “The Arctic Council recently took a decision to admit observer countries. This was a long process. But now we are joined by various EU states, China, India, Japan, and Korea. Though of course, the final decisions will be in the hands of the five leading players.” Lavrov also launched a barb at Greenpeace, one of the most vocal opponents of Arctic development, which had its ship temporarily seized while boarding a gas extraction platform off the Russian coast last year. “Greenpeace can rest easy – we share its concerns about oil spills and the ecological situation of this region. But unlike their attention-seeking protests, we are doing all the practical work.”
In the post-Soviet quarter-century, we have developed a fear of crises. And not without reason. But a crisis is just a transition from one state to another, ultimately leading to a smoother trajectory — or greater turmoil. Either outcome can be a means to a higher end. The final result is everything. Today the intensity of relations between Russia and the West has abated somewhat. The conflict in Ukraine is now one of arguing over positions, and outwardly the situation in Russia itself looks more stable than it did six months ago. The acute phase of the crisis seems to be over. However, the fundamental issues encircling Russia's relations with the West have not been resolved. Neither have the complexities of the country's general economic development. Slowly but surely, the antagonisms are accumulating irreversibly. And that means that new problems are simply a matter of time. A total loss of trust now characterizes Russia-West relations A qualitatively new element has appeared in relations between Russia and the West — a total loss of mutual trust. The problems of trust have been a mantra of politicians and experts over the entire post-Soviet period. Now the matter has been wrapped up conclusively. In the absence of trust, there are no problems with trust itself. The problem is finding it. Strategically, neither the West nor Russia considers each other as reliable partners. "Danger," "challenge" and "threat" are the standard buzzwords in the political lexicon on both sides. This atmosphere has permeated business projects and everyday contacts. The rift that began as political is becoming economic and even socio-economic. The new Euro-Atlantic security arrangement Along with the political relationship, the whole architecture of Euro-Atlantic security is crumbling too. It is no laughing matter and concerns everyone. What on earth is happening? It began first of all with the gradual erosion of the basic treaties on nuclear arms reduction, specifically the Intermediate and Shorter-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) and Strategic Arms Reduction (START) treaties. The matter is no longer confined to the standard political rhetoric. The INF Treaty was cited in the Ukraine Freedom Support Act, signed into law last year in the United States. START appeared in a recent amendment to the law on U.S. defense outlays, linking the financing of obligations on reducing offensive arms to Russia's respect for Ukrainian sovereignty. Nothing tragic has come of it so far — both treaties remain in force. But for the first time in three decades, an inherently local crisis is having a direct impact on the global security architecture. Even before the Ukraine crisis, Russia and the United States were divided on a host of local issues. But they were all discussed separately from the basic treaties on nuclear weapons. That informal procedure has been violated. As a result, we are sleepwalking towards the dismantlement of the system of Euro-Atlantic security laid down by the Soviet Union and the United States. One can argue long and hard about who threw the first stone. That's not what's important. In the medium term we will see a new nuclear arms race, in which regard the issues of conventional weapons, the militarization of space and the growing competition in cyberspace are interrelated.
Across Africa, successful coups are rare and getting rarer. This Economist Intelligence Unit has tracked the trend since 1960, shortly after colonial withdrawal began. Given the preconceived impression of Africa as coup crazy, many lose sight of the decline of coups. While working in Kenya recently, I called a leading investor in Silicon Valley to discuss Africa’s emerging technology sector. He sent me a graphic he found in the British newspaper mapping all the secessionist movements in Africa, and what the map would look like if they all succeeded. That speculative, uninformed graphic did its readers a terrible disservice, as it would if it sounded alarms about the secessionist movements in Texas, California and New York City, all of which have threatened to leave the US. There are many drivers for why coups are playing a diminishing role in Africa. Prominent among them is that governments are getting more capable at governing. The generation that liberated Africa has been replaced by one that is better educated, more widely traveled, and with access to better technology and information. Deep governance challenges remain, but Idi Amin and his ilk are no longer running the continent. Africa’s governments aren’t just becoming more stable. They’re becoming more representative, albeit in an irregular pattern, as befits a continent with 54 countries. The Polity IV Project measures political regimes on a spectrum from fully institutionalized autocracies (low scores) to fully institutionalized democracies (high scores). As can be seen below, the trend since 1990, across all of Africa, has been towards more democracy.
East Africa saw its FDI flows increasing by 11 per cent to $6.8 billion. FDI rose in the gas sector in the United Republic of Tanzania, and Ethiopia is becoming a hub for multinational enterprises producing garments and textiles. Central Africa received $12.1 billion of FDI in 2014, up 33 per cent from 2013. FDI inflows to the Republic of the Congo almost doubled, reaching $5.5 billion so that it became the second largest recipient country in Africa (Figure 1) with foreign investors undeterred despite falling commodity prices. The Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to attract notable flows. Southern Africa received $10.8 billion of FDI in 2014, down 2.4 per cent from 2013. While South Africa remained the country that receives the most foreign investment in the region as well as on the continent ($5.7 billion, down 31 per cent from 2013), Mozambique – the recipient of the third largest amount of FDI in Africa – also played a significant role in attracting $4.9 billion. Foreign investment into Africa is increasingly being made by developing-country multinational enterprises, such as firms from China and India. Meanwhile, a number of firms from developed countries (in particular France, the United States and the United Kingdom) were large net divestors from Africa during 2014. Demand from developing-economy investors for these divested assets was significant. As a result, African mergers and acquisitions increased by 32 per cent from $3.8 billion in 2013 to $5.1 billion in 2014, especially in the finance and oil and gas sectors. Services account for the largest portion of Africa’s stock of inward FDI, although the share is lower than in other regions, and concentrated in a relatively small number of countries, including Morocco, Nigeria and South Africa. Services FDI nonetheless accounted for 48 per cent of Africa’s total stock of FDI, more than twice the share of manufacturing (21 per cent) and significantly more than the primary sector (31 per cent) (Figure 2). Finance accounts for the largest portion of Africa’s stock of services FDI; by 2012 more than half of Africa’s services FDI stock was held in finance (56 per cent), followed by transport, storage and communications (21 per cent) and business activities (9 per cent). FDI into infrastructure and other services is becoming increasingly important. The stock of FDI into the transport, storage and communications industries grew more than four-fold between 2001 and 2012, from $8 billion to $34 billion. Although FDI accounts for a small portion of total infrastructure financing and development in Africa because of the wide use of non-equity modes of operation by multinational enterprises, FDI is increasingly visible in, for instance, the growing information and communications technology network as investors look to capture expanding consumer markets. FDI in services is important in supporting the participation of African economies in global value chains, as an increasing part of value added in trade consists of services. It is also important in the context of financing progress towards the sustainable development goals.
The G8’s Broader Middle East and North Africa (BMENA) initiative is an annual dialogue, run since 2004, between the governments and civil society representatives of the G8 and the BMENA countries and territories. In 2013, the UK, as the G8 Presidency, co-chaired the BMENA initiative with the Egyptian government. Key themes In 2013, the BMENA initiative focused on three themes: Economic development; Women’s empowerment; Freedom of expression. The co-chairs delivered a series of workshops in Amman, Jordan over 8-10 December 2013, drawing together Civil Society and Governments from G8 and BMENA members to discuss these themes. The workshops brought together 60 representatives of civil society to discuss and debate issues with representatives of BMENA and G8 Governments. In recognition of the important role that young people will play in the development of new societies and in creating stability, a focus on youth ran across all three of the key themes. At the conclusion of these events, representatives of each of the working groups presented a set of recommendations to the workshops. Primary Recommendations Economic Development Asset recovery: Civil society demands the recovery of assets of illicit origin to be expedited; Encouraging entrepreneurialism: Establishing technology/business incubators that provide technical assistance and funding for students from the BMENA region to participate in training programmes between MENA and global institutions; Supporting Small and Medium Size enterprises (SMEs): supporting SMEs to deliver growth in labour-intensive sectors through tax exemptions, industrial zones and modernising legislation to encourage investment and streamline bureaucracy. Women’s Empowerment Women’s economic empowerment: A joint government–civil society national consultative committee should be established to help women across the region become economically empowered; Women’s security: A national strategy to combat violence against women should be adopted by governments in cooperation with the G8 and other international partners; Women’s political participation: Establish a mechanism to coordinate at a national level each country’s civil society and government programmes for building women’s political capacity; Freedom of Expression Education: Government educational curricula should incorporate raising awareness of human rights and foster freedom of expression; Implementing legislation: Governments should more consistently and impartially enforce existing international and national commitments to freedom of expression, specifically by integrating Articles 14 and 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and a non-discriminatory and consistent implementation of national laws by police and judiciary; Access to information: Governments should make access to information a priority and pass and/or take steps to effectively implement appropriate legislation, which must take into account international standards as defined in the Additional Protocol to the ICCP; The Forum for the Future Following the workshops the tenth annual ‘Forum for the Future’ conference took place in Cairo on 17 December, co-chaired by Foreign Office Minister Hugh Robertson and Ambassador Hamdi Sanad Loza, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs. The event brought together ministers from the BMENA and G8 governments along with representatives from civil society and the private sector to reflect on the outcomes of the workshops, strengthen the BMENA initiative network and agree recommendations for further progress. Outcomes of BMENA The recommendations from the Civil Society/Government workshops will be shared with all BMENA and G8 governments and act as a point of reference for work in the area. For example, in response to a civil society call for additional support to help Arab women enter the workforce, in 2013 the UK committed £10M (matched by the Islamic Development Bank) to a new Arab Women’s Enterprise Fund. The British Government anticipates that the recommendations of BMENA 2013 will play a similar role in steering its strategy and future initiatives.
The international credit rating agency upgraded Rwanda to ‘B+’ from the ‘B’ rating it had previously given the East African state earlier this year. “Rwanda certainly has been one of Africa’s great success stories. There are two main reasons why we took the decision to upgrade Rwanda, the first being a track record of prudent and coherent fiscal on monetary policy and the second is Rwanda really has a stellar growth record,” Carmen Altenkrich, Director Sovereign Group at Fitch told CNBC Africa. The country also saw the issue ratings on its senior unsecured foreign and local currency bonds as well as its Country Ceiling upgraded to ‘B+’ from ‘B’. “Over the past five years, Rwanda has been able to grow at 6.9 per cent on average annually which really makes it a very strong growth story,” Altenkrich said. According to the latest, United Nations Human Development Report, Rwanda recorded the fastest growth in Africa between the years 2000 and 2013. Fitch anticipates Rwanda’s real GDP growth to be 6.5 per cent and to increase by 0.5 to 1.5 per cent in the medium term, in line with performance during the previous decade. According to the rating agency, the growth will benefit from stronger local integration within the East African Community and speedy gains in agriculture, mines, tourism and services. In May 2014 the East African nation was floated with 15 billion Rwandan Franc, twice the amount and issued at a yield of 12.25 per cent. In 2013, Rwanda became the first East African country to have issued a Eurobond, raising 400 million US dollars. Rwanda’s short-term foreign currency IDR was affirmed at 'B'. Meanwhile, Fitch Ratings affirmed Kenya's Long-term foreign rating at 'B+', reflecting the five-year average growth rate. The international credit rating agency based in the United States and the United Kingdom bases its ratings on factors including how small an economic shift would be necessary to affect the standing of a bond issuance and what kind of debt is held by the company or country. “We have had some good and bad news. On the positive said we have seen the current account deficit which ran in double digits for the past few years coming down to 7.8 per cent of GDP. We have also seen the government take more decisive steps towards addressing the business environment and come September we are also anticipating a 20 per cent increase in the GDP,” Altenkrich said
We have made concerted efforts to address this iniquity on the UN Security Council and create the conditions necessary for the regime to return to the negotiating table and take part in serious discussions to bring about a political solution. In support of this objective, the UK is focusing its efforts on three key areas: Strengthening an inclusive opposition, increasing pressure on the regime politically and economically through EU sanctions and isolating Assad while working for a political resolution with international support; Managing the humanitarian, human rights and wider impact on Syria/region, pushing for a new, stronger humanitarian resolution on the UN Security Council and increasing funding for cross-border aid deliveries to a total of £76 million; and Limiting the terrorist and wider extremist threat to the UK, and chemical/biological weapon use/ proliferation. On 20 November 2012 the Foreign Secretary set out to Parliament that the UK had decided to recognise the National Coalition of Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces as the sole legitimate representative of the Syrian people as it has a democratic and pluralist vision for Syria. Since the start of the revolution, the UK has been at the forefront of providing the moderate opposition with practical and political support. This year we have provided more than £20 million in support to save lives and provide services to the Syrian population. This support includes training and equipping civil defence teams to carry out fire fighting and search and rescue; training over 300 Syrian journalists and activists helping to develop an independent Syrian media; funding local level peace-building projects within Syria and between communities in neighbouring countries where refugees are based. The government is also responding to serious human rights concerns in Syria. In partnership with other donor countries, we have funded the collection of documentary evidence of Human Rights abuses and funded Law of Armed Conflict training to help armed groups understand their responsibilities and obligations under international law and international Human Rights standards. Most recently we have started funding a multi-donor project to support the Free Syrian Police, who are responsible for providing basic civilian policing in large areas of opposition controlled territory. We have also played an important role in UN Human Rights Council discussions on the escalating human rights violations and deteriorating humanitarian situation, and in resolutions adopted by the Council on 1 and 23 March 2012 condemning these human rights violations. On 28 November 2012, the United Nations General Assembly also adopted an Arab-led resolution on the human rights situation in Syria condemning the widespread and systematic human rights violations being committed by the Syrian regime and its militia.
In July of this year, France launched Operation Barkhane, an ambitious counterterrorism initiative spread across five countries in Africa's Sahel and Sahara regions. The mission seeks to build upon the success of the French military intervention that drove al Qaeda-linked jihadi militants from northern Mali in 2013, and comes at a time when the US is expanding its own counterterrorism operations on the continent, setting the stage for what some analysts consider a burgeoning Franco-American alliance in Africa. "This is a new chapter in French-American relations," Michael Shurkin, a former CIA analyst who is now a political scientist at the RAND Corporation, told VICE News. "There is an unprecedented level of cooperation going on." In an August 11 memo to US Secretary of State John Kerry and US Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel, President Barack Obama, citing an "unforeseen emergency," authorized the transfer of up to $10 million "to assist France in its efforts to secure Mali, Niger, and Chad from terrorists and violent extremism." The move hints at a division of labor in which the US foots the bill for a cash-strapped French military that is both logistically and politically better placed than the US to engage in combat operations in the Sahel. An even more striking example of US-French counterterror cooperation in Africa may have taken place earlier this month, when US airstrikes in Somalia killed Ahmed Godane, co-founder of the al Shabaab Islamist group. Subsequent reporting by French magazine Le Point suggests that the actionable intelligence leading to Godane's death came from the French, an indication that the two nations already have mechanisms in place for tight cooperation at a highly sensitive level. All of this comes as part of what analysts have dubbed the US military's "pivot to Africa." Although the US has engaged in counterterrorism activities in Africa since 2002, military operations have grown rapidly under the Obama administration. Camp Lemonnier in Djibouti remains the only official, permanent US base in Africa, but over the last decade, a constellation of sites, including "intermediate staging bases," and "cooperative security locations," have spread across the continent. A near-constant rotation of US military personnel, intelligence operatives, and private military contractors who engage in humanitarian missions, civil affairs activities, bilateral training exercises, and covert operations is now underway in almost every country in Africa.
The Horn of Africa Initiative A new report from the World Bank Group analyzes the critical factors contributing to regional instability and vulnerability in the Horn of Africa and proposes how countries with help from their international partners, can best address them. The report describes a new $1.8 billion initiative, which the World Bank will commit over the next 24 months, to boost economic growth and opportunity, reduce poverty, and spur business activity in the eight countries of the Horn region: Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, and Uganda. “This new financing represents a major new opportunity for the people of the Horn of Africa to make sure they get access to clean water, nutritious food, health care, education, and jobs,” said World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim on the first day of a joint visit with the UN and other partners to Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia. “There is greater opportunity now for the Horn of Africa to break free from its cycles of drought, food insecurity, water insecurity, and conflict by building up regional security, generating a peace dividend, especially among young women and men, and spurring more cross-border cooperation.” The proposed Horn of Africa initiative builds on and complements the large country and regional programs that the WBG and other partners such as AfDB, AUC, EU, IGAD and IsDB are already supporting in the HoA. It seeks to take advantage of growing regional cooperation on security and development, progress being made in countries like Somalia, and new economic opportunities (linked, for example, to oil and mineral discoveries). On October 27th, along with the World Bank Group announcement of $1.8 billion, the European Union announced that it would support the countries in the region with a total of around $3.7 billion until 2020, of which about 10 percent would be for cross-border activities; the African Development Bank announced a pledge of $1.8 billion over the next three years for countries of the Horn of Africa region; while the Islamic Development Bank committed to deploy up to $1 billion in new financing in its four member countries in the Horn of Africa (Djibouti, Somalia, Sudan and Uganda). A further $2 billion could be provided by the Arab Coordination Group over the period 2015-2017.
Steinmeier believes East Africa could develop into a politically strong and economically stable region. A customs union encompassing Rwanda, Kenya, Tanzania, Burundi and Uganda, would create an internal market of at least 160 million consumers. During this trip Steinmeier referred cautiously to "a region of growing political and economic stability." Some members of the younger generation of East Africans, whether in DR Congo, Rwanda or Kenya, are apparently pinning their hopes on Germany. In surveys or comments on Facebook, young people say wish German companies could help boost the recovery of their respective national economies. They would also like German politicians to act as act as a counterweight to their often corrupt and patriarchal elites. "Young people want change," said, Mukazi Ndekezi, a student of international relations from Rwanda. Mukazi, who is a youth ambassador, seeks to promote the interests of young people at the EAC. Not surprisingly, she believes regional cooperation will succeed. Young people between the ages of 17 and 35, she notes, account for two thirds of the population of the EAC region. "They're really done with conflicts," she said of the under-35s. "And I have seen a positive impact of the regional integration. Like students, they collaborate, they talk, they discuss, and they share their views, their ideas. And then they understand each other."
West African leaders have agreed to club together to wage war on Nigeria's Boko Haram. The decision was made during a summit hosted by French President Francois Hollande in Paris. The US, France, and the UK have vowed to help Nigeria with intelligence. The summit brought together Hollande and Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan, as well as the presidents of Cameroon, Niger, Chad, and Benin. Representatives from the US and UK were also present. The West African nations vowed to wage war on the Islamist militant group, which they say now has links to Al-Qaeda. “Boko Haram is no longer a local terrorist group, it is operating clearly as an Al-Qaeda operation. It is an Al-Qaeda of West Africa,” Jonathan said during a news conference in Paris. “We have shown our commitment for a regional approach. Without West African countries coming together we will not be able to crush these terrorists,” he added. Both President Idriss Deby of Chad and Cameroon’s President Paul Biya used even stronger language. “We are here to declare war on Boko Haram,” said Biya. Biya also stressed that the problem is no longer regional, but also affects the West, recalling the kidnapping of two Italian priests and a Canadian nun by Boko Haram in April. Idriss echoed Biya's words, saying the West African nations had agreed to “take this situation head on and launch a total war on Boko Haram.” After the meeting, French President Hollande said that all those present had agreed on a “global and regional action plan.” “Boko Haram is a major threat for all of western Africa and now central Africa, with proven links to AQIM (Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb) and other terrorist organizations,” said Hollande. France has about 6,000 soldiers in neighboring Mali, as well as troops in the nearby Central African Republic, and is therefore dedicated to preventing a deterioration in Nigeria's security.
Rival militant groups in the Central African Republic agreed to a peace deal on Sunday aimed at ending a conflict that has claimed the lives of thousands of people and displaced nearly a million. The accord called for the disarmament of the groups and their possible prosecution for war crimes committed during the two-year conflict. The agreement was signed between 10 militias and the defense ministry in the capital of Bangui, Reuters reported. "On the path towards peace, the step made today is a very important one," Babacar Gaye, the top U.N. official in the country, reportedly said. "I want to believe that the commitment is sincere and that we will engage in the construction of progressive peace." U.N. authorities said that all sides had agreed to an accord where they would formally disarm, renounce political violence, and begin a process of "disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation," Voice of America reported. "The fighters of all the armed groups accept and commit to putting a definitive end to the armed conflicts in Central African Republic," the agreement said, according to Reuters. The deal also included an agreement banning the use of children as soldiers or other workers. While the accord raised the possibility of amnesty, it reportedly added that amnesty would be denied to those who committed the "crime of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity."
The epicenter of political violence in Africa during 2014 was undoubtedly Nigeria, particularly its northeastern border with Cameroon, Chad, and Niger. Boko Haram’s insurgency cost thousands of lives, displaced countless more, and led to widespread devastation. The past year also saw Boko Haram expand its operations into neighboring Cameroon where security forces have faced challenges in containing its increasing strength and widening field of action. Troublingly, it is becoming increasingly evident that neighboring Chad and Niger, which have already experienced large numbers of displaced persons and refugees from Nigeria, are being drawn into the conflict. As a result, the African Union, which has, in the recent past, deployed sizeable military forces to Somalia and Mali, is considering a new mission in the area to contain and rollback Boko Haram. North Africa To the North, Libya descended into civil war with a faction associated with General Khalifa Haftar and the National Government in Tobruk controlling the eastern half of the country and a faction associated with Libya Dawn (Fajr Libya) and islamist groups like Ansar al-Sharia controlling the western half. As with Boko Haram’s destabilization of the entire Niger River Delta region, the nascent Second Libyan Civil War threatens to destabilize surrounding Egypt, Tunisia, and Algeria. Moreover, as the power vacuum in northeastern Syria was a crucial factor in the rise of ISIS, islamist groups may seek to increasingly co-opt the Libya Dawn coalition in the western part of the country or carve out their own areas of control and influence. There are some encouraging signs in nearby Egypt, Algeria, Mali, and Sudan, which have all seen declines in deaths from political violence during 2014, but still face sizeable ethnic and sectarian insurgencies of their own. East Africa To the East, the Central African Republic continued to suffer from a civil war between Seleka, Anti-Balaka, and Government militias. The Seleka, associated with militant Islam, and the Anti-Balaka, associated with militant Christianity and Animism, are attempting to force a breakup of the country along sectarian and ethnic lines with the country’s population caught in the fatal crossfire. In neighboring South Sudan, civil war between factions associated with the country’s Dinka and Nuer tribes intensified while, to the north, fighting between South Sudanese separatists and the government of Omar al-Bashir declined, but still constituted a major conflict. Farther to the East in Somalia, fighting between the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the islamist, militant group al Shabaab also intensified. Southern Africa To the South, the Democratic Republic of Congo’s endemic strife calmed while the number of deaths from political violence in Uganda increased. Other than civil strife in South Africa, most of the continent’s southern tip saw both low levels of deaths from violence and little change in the total numbers of deaths from the previous year. However, off the eastern coast of Africa, Madagascar has experienced a marked increase in deaths, particularly involving a number of insurgent Dahalo militias.
From the civil wars in South Sudan and Central African Republic, to insurgencies in the Sahel and Nigeria and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, Africa’s worst crises drag on … and will probably continue to do so through 2015. South Sudan’s civil war is one year old and still going strong. Neither Pres. Salva Kiir nor his challenger Riek Machar have any incentive to stop fighting, at least not until the next rainy season makes military maneuvers impractical—five months from now. During the rainy season, the possibility exists for a peace treaty. In theory. But in practice, this will only happen if one or both sides suffers a major military defeat or suffers serious international sanctions. Neither is likely. We hope we’re wrong about this, but our guess is that South Sudan’s civil war will see its second anniversary. Of course, the war in South Sudan has its roots in the country’s incredibly violent recent history—in particular, its secession from Sudan. The South’s northern neighbor may have lost a huge chunk of its territory when the South seceded, but its main internal conflicts continued. The most prominent of those, the civil war in Darfur, has slipped from the headlines in recent years, but in fact it’s as bad as ever. The same goes for the genocidal campaign that the regime in Khartoum is perpetrating against the people of the Nuba Mountains. And several other smaller conflicts are simmering There’s little indication that any of this will change in 2015. If it does, the impetus will likely be regime change. President Omar Al Bashir’s throne has looked shakier than ever over the last two years, with major demonstrations challenging his rule in the capital. As now-former heads of states from Tunisia’s Ben Ali to Burkina Faso’s Blaise Compaoré can attest, its hard hanging on to power indefinitely. Like in Darfur, the conflict in Central African Republic also lost some of its media appeal in 2014. Peacekeeping forces have regained a measure of control in parts of the country, although the caretaker government of Pres. Catherine Samba-Panza is still borderline powerless. With France shrinking its military contribution in CAR and rebels and militias still in control of much of the countryside—as well as parts of the capital—the country is looking at an uneasy and at times violent stalemate. Above—Nigerian Mobile Police officers and their armored vehicle. At top—Tuareg milita in Mali. Photos via Wikipedia Boko Haram is worse than ever If there was anything less worthwhile in 2014 than believing in the longevity of South Sudan’s peace treaties, it was listening to the Nigerian military’s frequent announcements that it was just about to defeat the Boko Haram insurgency. Yes, the military scored some victories here and there, but in general Boko Haram is as strong as it ever was. More people died in the conflict in 2014 than in any previous year. And while the Nigerian government throws more and more troops and money at the problem, this is unlikely to end the crisis any time soon. There’s some hope that once this year’s hotly contested presidential elections are over, the political class will get its act together and sort out the insurgency in the north as well as some of Nigeria’s other pressing problems. But that’s a tenuous hope at best—especially since Boko Haram was, early on, a useful pawn in Nigeria’s great political chess game. By now the group has fractured and evolved beyond the control of the political masterminds who nurtured its growth. Al Qaeda-affiliated groups are still active in the Sahel, especially in northern Mali. While the big terror attack that we predicted fortunately didn’t take place in 2014, the risk of a large-scale terrorist operation—comparable to the attack on the In Amenas natural gas facility in 2013—remains all too real. The conflict between secessionist Tuareg rebels and the Malian government likewise continues. At the moment the country is holding together mostly thanks to U.N. and French forces and some determined diplomacy. Outside pressure will likely continue to suppress large-scale conflict, but the potential remains for hostilities between the Tuareg and the army. Meanwhile in Libya, there’s little doubt that the violent standoff will continue between secular forces loyal to Gen. Khalifa Haftar and Islamist militias. Burundian soldiers. Photo via Wikipedia Elections as a risk factor All these conflicts have one thing in common—they’re all well underway. But what new conflicts could emerge in 2015? It will be an interesting year, because many conflict-prone countries have important elections on the calendar. Nigeria, for one. Also Ivory Coast, where the last presidential election reignited a dormant civil war. In West Africa, the tiny country of Togo has already seen huge demonstrations against the continued rule of long-time president Faure Gnassingbé, who is running for re-election in 2015. Togo could potentially go the way of Burkina Faso, where an attempt by Pres. Blaise Compaoré to abolish constitutional term limits led to his violent ouster. On the other side of the continent, Burundi—a fragile country prone to civil war—will also hold elections. Honorable mentions include the ongoing conflicts in Democratic Republic of the Congo, the ramifications in Cameroon of the Boko Haram insurgency and CAR’s civil war, Egypt’s and Tunisia’s fighting with domestic terrorist groups or the Western Sahara conflict. Plus the situations in Somalia, northeastern Kenya and the potential for war between Ethiopia and Eritrea. 2015 could be a violent year for Africa.
Many years ago, a Foreign Office grandee of an older generation, Sir Julian Bullard, used to tell aspiring new diplomats that the best reason for learning German was to read Nietzsche’s epigrams. I’m not sure many of them took his advice to heart, but I did at least read the one that says Wenn du lange in einen Abgrund blickst, blickt der Abgrund auch in dich hinein, which translates as: if you look long into an abyss, the abyss also looks into you. Another word for abyss is, of course, Gulf. Things are changing in the Persian Gulf region. An elderly, ailing Saudi king dies and is replaced by his elderly, ailing half-brother – just as Houthi rebels appear to achieve a major success in Yemen. Meanwhile, representatives of more than 20 countries – including Britain, the US and Iraq – agonise over how to tackle Islamic State (Isis), with Baghdad seeking more support from its western allies for the fight. Faced with so much change in the Middle East, western governments seem to be at a crossroads. Not so long ago, we were intent upon a bombing campaign to remove the Assad regime in Syria. Now, only 18 months or so later, the continuation of that regime appears to be a necessity – if a rather distasteful one – for western policy in the region, if the much more dangerous threat from Isis is to be contained or removed. At the same time our attitudes to Iran have also shifted, as the process of negotiation over the Iranian nuclear question has ground slowly forward. I was surprised last week to hear a colleague suggest that the idea that Iran was a force for stability in the Persian Gulf region was now conventional wisdom. But our attitudes have not shifted enough for us fully to embrace the Iranians as allies in Iraq and Syria. That’s a perverse situation. And there are still influential voices in the US and elsewhere who, like the Saudis, warn of Iranian expansionism. Those same voices have tended to laud the alleged reforming zeal of King Abdullah (nothing I have heard leads me to think his successor will be any more zealous), ignoring the uncomfortable fact that most of the worst Islamic extremism and terrorism of the past two decades has tracked back, through funding and religious influence, ultimately, to Saudi Arabia. In this situation, the state we have been accustomed to seeing as our enemy (Iran) is starting to look more like a potential friend, and the state we treat as an ally looks more and more, if not like an enemy, like the sort of friend that renders it unnecessary to have enemies. It would almost certainly be unwise to expect too much of a possible alliance with the Iranians in fighting Isis. We should be fully alive to the range of opportunities opened up by the developing rapprochement with Iran; it is one of the few bright spots in an otherwise dark picture. But the Iranian armed forces are not powerful as others in the region in terms of big battalions; their Revolutionary Guard Corps is experienced and highly competent, but they could probably not do much more than they are doing already in Iraq and Syria. Even if they could help, it would probably not be in the interests of long-term stability, because heavy intervention by Shia Iran in Iraq and Syria would probably only incite further resistance from Sunni Arab groups. The key to success against Isis has to involve encouraging Sunni Arabs themselves to reject Isis, as they rejected and fought al-Qaida in Iraq in coordination with the so-called US surge from 2007 onwards. Unfortunately, western support for, and relationships with, those Sunni Arab elements dwindled after the success of that policy, and that is partly why we have Isis. Rebuilding those relationships now is going to be difficult because the Sunnis feel the west betrayed them. In articulating our policy in the region, in circumstances of sharpening sectarian divisions, it is all the more important that our commitment to stability is clear and unequivocal – particularly our commitment to the extirpation not just of Isis and al-Qaida but also, as far as possible, of the causes that brought them about. This is where I come back to Bullard, and to Nietzsche: the Persian Gulf looks also into you – in other words, the tensions of the region require us to re-examine our own policies. Stability in the Persian Gulf region is what we say we want, and much analysis and commentary takes that as a given. But do we really? How much do we want it? Do we want it enough, for example, to risk alienating our ostensible allies along the Gulf’s southern shore, and changing their disposition toward lucrative weapons purchases? Because that is what would happen if we were to tackle head on the role some of the countries play in funding the most radically destabilising Sunni extremist groups, such as Isis and al-Qaida. Many would agree that the extremist Sunni ideology of Isis is merely a step on from, or the application of, the Wahhabi Islam that is the basis of Saudi Arabia. It is this extremism that is driving the burgeoning sectarian conflict between Sunni and Shia, potentially disastrous on a hitherto undreamed-of scale. Or do we instead, whatever the window dressing, calculate that our national interests, in the narrowest sense, are entirely about arms sales to Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states? Do we turn a blind eye to the extremist sympathies and funding that flows from them, and in effect allow these states to buy our foreign policy along with our weapons? Buy one, get one free. Julian Bullard would not, I think, have recommended the latter course. It should be plain enough that to throw in our lot on one side of a sectarian conflict in the Middle East could have catastrophic consequences both for regional stability and for our own interests. But it seems as though that is the drift of the policy thinking of at least some elements of the present government. If the UK, in particular, is to have any credibility in the future in this region, they must be restrained.
To hear Saudi leaders tell it, the primary threat to the kingdom’s stability is the Islamic Republic of Iran. Worried over Washington and Tehran’s slowly improving relationship, Riyadh has projected an increasingly militarized and sectarian foreign policy aimed at countering Iran’s alleged hegemonic aims in the Middle East. Yet tension with Iran is only one element of an increasingly complicated mosaic of threats to Saudi Arabia. In fact, the gravest dangers to the kingdom come from within. Saudi Arabia is a classic rentier state. In exchange for the absolute acquiescence of its 29 million subjects, the ruling al-Saud family provides services such as housing, health care, education, and a variety of subsidies – all funded by the country’s substantial oil wealth. Combined with intolerance for dissent, control over these resources has historically served as the ruling family’s hedge against instability of all varieties. In 2011, for example, the Saudi leadership responded to the Arab Spring revolts across the region by injecting $130 billion in the form of salary increases, public-sector job creation, and housing subsidies to minimize the potential for an uprising. Meanwhile, the kingdom’s appalling human rights record has deteriorated. Over the past four years, beheadings have skyrocketed and torture has flourished. However, this authoritarian rentier state model is unsustainable. Oil revenues are down, local unrest is simmering, and extremists are taking aim at the kingdom from without and within. The roots of all these problems come not from Iran but from inside Saudi Arabia itself. Feeling the Pinch The global slide in oil prices has taken a toll on Saudi Arabia’s fossil-fueled economy. Foreign reserves dropped by $36 billion this spring, and are projected to fall another$300 billion within two years. The kingdom’s 2015 budget deficit – the first in seven years – is projected to reach $40 billion. With the kingdom waging a costly military campaign in Yemen, and the recently installed King Salman granting salary bonuses to public employees and military families, Saudi Arabia’s coffers are being drained at a rapid pace. Demographic realities exacerbate these fiscal pressures. Unlike many Arab states that have declining or stable birth rates, Saudi Arabia’s population is growing. More half of the kingdom’s population is under the age of 25 and two-thirds are under 29. With a high youth unemployment rate and an estimated 25 percent of Saudis living in poverty, the economic grievances that drove Arabs in Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, and Syria to revolt could spark similar forms of resistance among Saudi Arabians, constituting a major worry for the royal family. The kingdom’s educational system is in dire need of reform. While many young Saudis are well-versed in the Koran as a result of their religious education, they often lack skills that are more practical and applicable to the global economy. The human capital of the country’s women is especially underdeveloped. Sixty percent of Saudis enrolled in higher education are women, yet the country’s female unemployment rate is 32.5percent. King Salman’s predecessor, King Abdullah, pursued progressive reforms (by Saudi Arabian standards) on gender issues, but the kingdom’s conservative elements prevented much progress. The reality is that Saudi law still recognizes women as property of their male relatives. In Saudi Arabia, which remains the only country that bans female drivers, if a woman falls in public it’s even illegal for an ambulance to pick her up. Militant Jihadism Since the 18th century, the Saudi ruling family has relied on an alliance with the ultra-conservative Wahhabi sect of Sunni Islam. Yet Saudi Arabia’s leadership has increasingly found this arrangement problematic, with several Wahhabi militant groups accusing the ruling al-Saud family of corruption and dedicating themselves to overthrowing it. Scores of jihadist terrorist attacks in the kingdom, which peaked during the al-Qaedainsurgency of the mid-2000s, highlight the failure of Saudi Arabia’s rulers to maintain the loyalty of certain Wahhabi hardliners. Even as Saudi Arabia contributes to the U.S.-led military campaign against Daesh – another name for the self-styled “Islamic State” – thousands of Saudis have fled the kingdom to join Daesh’s ranks on the Iraqi and Syrian battlefields. Meanwhile, its supporters have launched a spate of “lone wolf” attacks against foreigners and Shiites in the kingdom. The caliphate’s leaders have openly targeted Saudi Arabia’s leadership. In a statement last November, Daesh leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi announced his intention to expand Daesh to the “lands of al-Haramein” – a reference to Mecca and Medina. He referred to the ruling family as “the serpent’s head” and the “stronghold of the disease,” likening them to the pre-Islamic pagan rulers of Mecca and calling on supporters in the kingdom to rise up against them. A few months later, when King Abdullah died, the group’s supporters took to social media to celebrate the death of the “thief of the two holy mosques,” further demonstrating Daesh’s vitriol for the monarchy. Although Riyadh has made combatting Daesh a lower priority than fighting Houthi rebels in Yemen, the kingdom is extremely vulnerable to the group and its quest to foment chaos in the Gulf region. Given Daesh’s rapid rise to power in large portions of Iraq and Syria, and the mushrooming of its affiliated groups from Libya to Pakistan, Riyadh has every reason to be concerned about implications for the kingdom’s security. Rising Sectarian Temperatures Ever since the Wahhabi conquest of the Arabian Peninsula, the Shiites of modern-day Saudi Arabia – roughly 15 percent of the total population – have endured state-sponsored discrimination, social marginalization, and campaigns of violence waged by anti-Shiite hardliners. Particularly since the Arab Spring, Saudi Arabia’s Eastern Province – home to virtually the entire Shiite minority and all of the kingdom’s oil reserves – has experienced growing sectarian unrest and heightened political tension. In response to increasingly vocal demands for political, economic, and social reforms from their Shiite subjects, Saudi authorities have waged a harsh crackdown in the Eastern Province, maintaining that Shiite dissent is a product of Iranian meddling. Saudi Arabia’s actions in neighboring countries have further raised sectarian temperatures. Riyadh’s decision in 2011 to deploy security forces to neighboring Bahrain to help the Sunni rulers in Manama suppress a democratic revolt from Bahraini Shiites intensified tensions between Saudi Arabia’s Sunni rulers and their own Shiite subjects. Furthermore, while Saudi Arabia’s conservative religious establishment has called Riyadh’s military campaign in Yemen a “holy war,” Shiites in the Eastern Province have vocally condemned the kingdom’s war against the Houthis. In early April, clashes erupted in Awamiyah between security forces and Shiite protestors demanding an end to Saudi Arabia’s campaign in Yemen. Last year, Sheik Nimr al-Nimr – a revered Shiite cleric in the Eastern Province – was sentenced to death for allegedly inciting violence against the kingdom. Saudi Arabian Shiites see his sentence as a political maneuver aimed at quelling dissent in the Eastern Province. If Nimr is actually executed, sectarian tensions in the kingdom, as well as in other Middle Eastern countries, can only rise. Documented attacks against security forces by armed Shiite factions in the Eastern Province represent a growing potential for militancy and violent unrest. Some hardline Wahhabis complain that Saudi authorities are too soft on Shiite dissent. Daesh has exploited this tension by demanding that Gulf Arab backers of the group carry out violence directed at all Shiites of the Arabian Peninsula. Daesh claimed responsibility for two suicide bombings targeting Shiite mosques in the Eastern Province this May, following a shooting of Shiites in the district of al-Ahsa on November 3, which marked the Shiite holy day of Ashura. The threat of more Daesh-orchestrated and inspired terrorism in the Eastern Province poses a difficult dilemma for Saudi Arabia’s leadership. Following May’s violence, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Nayef bin Abdulaziz al-Saud immediately visited the Eastern Province in an effort to convince locals that their rulers are committed to the security of all Saudi Arabians. However, many Shiites hold the kingdom’s religious establishment responsible for the attacks and maintain that officials in Riyadh turn a blind eye to Daesh’s sectarian agenda in the kingdom. Ultimately, it will be difficult for Riyadh to maintain a lid on Shiite dissent while Daesh openly inflames sectarian tensions. Daesh’s recent suicide bombing at a Shiite mosque in Kuwait City, which killed 27 and injured 227, along with its calls for violence against Bahrain’s Shiites, underscores its commitment to exploiting the Gulf’s sectarian tensions as a means of spreading its violent campaign to the region’s monarchies – with Saudi Arabia being the group’s top prize. This balancing act is further complicated by Saudi Arabia’s efforts to topple the Iranian-backed regime in Syria and the kingdom’s ongoing war against the Zaydi Shiite Houthis in Yemen, which will continue to fuel tension between Saudi Arabia’s Sunni leadership and Shiite subjects. While the Saudi government relies on its petro-wealth to buy loyalty and crush all dissent, a plethora of domestic and regional developments make the need for genuine and serious reforms in the kingdom increasingly urgent. Failure to implement them can only result in the deepening of these grievances. The prospects for political and social stability in the kingdom will depend on the new leadership’s ability to address these internal issues in a truly meaningful way. Changes in Saudi Arabia’s reactionary society and political system cannot be expected in a short period of time. But they won’t get underway at all until Saudi leaders stop blaming Iran for their problems and start looking within.
Striking Without Asking Our current approach to the Islamic State and the greater Middle East tracks the Greeks’ pre-Heracles whack-a-mole approach to the Hydra. We attack one manifestation of violence at a time, without a thought about the likely consequences of our own violence. We’re surprised when the threat morphs, metastasizes, or appears in a new place. We note that the terrorists are resilient or adaptive or flexible, but do not ask why or whether our own actions contributed to their resilience. Describing the problem as “hydra-headed” conveys puzzlement and frustration, but it’s merely descriptive — there’s no further analysis. Even our language fits the Hydra myth pattern. We seek to “decapitate” the leadership of terrorist organizations. Take out Osama bin Laden or Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and the problem will be solved. However, cutting off these heads has made no appreciable dent in the threat posed by the groups they led. When a movement arises out of frustration and grievance, emergent leadership is more likely a consequence of the movement than a cause of it. The term “counter-terrorism” itself evokes a classic Hydra strategy. As President Obama stated last September, “Our objective is clear: We will degrade, and ultimately destroy, [the Islamic State] through a comprehensive and sustained counter-terrorism strategy.” That is, we expect to prevail by attacking the attacker, rather than figuring out why the threat keeps multiplying, or why Islamist insurgencies have enjoyed at least passive support from populations in Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria, and throughout the Middle East. Unintended Consequences The Hydra myth also symbolizes the dangers of taking action without considering predictable collateral consequences. Again, our language is suggestive. We take pride in our “surgical” strikes, for example. Following a medical analogy, we pretend we can excise the tumor or repair the heart valve with precision, not affecting surrounding tissue — like lopping off a Hydra head. Implicitly, we assume that the “removal” of a drone strike target has no effect on the human environment in which the alleged insurgent was embedded. “Hey! No collateral damage,” we cry. “We didn’t kill any civilians.” These strikes do, in fact, kill plenty of civilians. But more to the point, enraging and humiliating them can be similarly detrimental. Every time we kick in a door in search of insurgents, or attack a convoy or wedding party with drones, the typical result is the creation of more angry and disaffected people ready to take revenge. A “surgical strike” is a Hydra tactic.
Seeing requires distance. Looked at from afar, there is nothing really new or unique about current patterns of war and terror on planet Earth. Rather, from time immemorial, such frenzied turmoil as we now see generated most conspicuously by the Islamic State militants in Iraq has been a recurring theme. For the most part, in the always-corrosively self-limiting life of civilizations, there is nothing new under the sun. Still, watching the latest news of the Islamic State's slaughter and enslavement, a final query can no longer be stifled: Just how much more suffering can our tormented species endure? This is not a gratuitous question. In our universities, especially where prevailing intellectual fashion is determined by magazine ratings, advertisements and “branding,” students deserve exposure to far more genuinely refined forms of learning. In essence, they will soon need to study something more enlightening than the grimly intersecting rudiments of commercial success and corporate conformance. At a minimum, university students require an awareness that each single individual's personal and professional accomplishments can make sense only if the planet, as a whole, has a correspondingly decent and durable future. Such an awareness is already evident in the writings of the great Jesuit philosopher Pierre Teilhard De Chardin: "The egocentric ideal of a future reserved for those who have managed to attain egoistically the extremity of 'everyone for himself' is false and against nature. No element can move and grow except with and by all the others with itself." It also means, reciprocally, that our wider planetary civilization can be promising only when its billions of constituent residents are encouraged to live and strive meaningfully. The dual-level message is rather simple. No one's private success can ever be sustainable, if the world, as a whole, has no sustainable future. No conceivably gainful configuration of planet Earth can be sustainable if the great human legions and states who comprise it are themselves morally, spiritually and intellectually adrift. “The blood-dimmed tide is loosed," observed William Butler Yeats. But, just as it was for Yeats, and for countless others long before the celebrated Irish poet, today’s expanding global chaos is merely a symptom. It is not the underlying "disease." All world politics still expresses an unchanging and deeply misplaced human habit. This is the near-universal incapacity of individuals and societies to discover authentic self-worth and esteem within themselves. Somehow, we humans always manage to miss what is most important. Seemingly indecipherable, there is a critical inner horizon to world politics. In literature, this horizon, which so desperately needs to be understood, can be more readily encountered in Soren Kierkegaard, Sigmund Freud, Friedrich Nietzsche, Hermann Hesse, Carl Jung and de Chardin, than in Adam Smith, Karl Marx or John Maynard Keynes. Its persistent rejection, in real life, reflects the most elemental failure of planetary social and political life. This failure is the steadfast refusal, of individuals, all over the world, to seek their irreducibly core identity as persons, inside themselves. Today, in Iraq, Syria, Gaza, Lebanon, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Yemen, the Central African Republic, Nigeria, Kenya and myriad other places facing sudden or incremental dissolution, we will find ritualized adherence to the all-consuming tribal claims of state, class and faith. In American cities, too, we may observe the unabashedly tribal demands of assorted criminal syndicates and organized street gangs. Here, while obviously very different in their particular group's various motives, the animating conformance dynamic of "belonging" or "fitting in" is largely the same. The tribe is microcosm. From the beginning, from the muddled primal promiscuity of our early global politics, all vital behavior in world affairs has been driven by some kind of "tribal" conflict, by an incessantly virulent and polarizing struggle between "us" and "them." Literally, from the unhidden human origins of our so-called "civilizations," from the pitiably aggregated totals of individual human souls seeking some palpable form of redemption, most people have felt lost, or alone or abandoned outside a tribe. Drawing virtually all sense of self worth from a falsely-consoling membership in the state or the faith or the race or the gang – from what Freud had called the "primal horde," Nietzsche, more simply, the "herd," and Kierkegaard, perhaps most insightfully, the "crowd" – we humans still cannot satisfy even the most patently minimal requirements of social coexistence. To be sure, as humans, our technical and scientific intelligence, not to mention our all-consuming social networking, is enviable and remarkable. But this more or less commendable progress still has no recognizable counterpart in human relations. Yes, we can certainly manufacture complex jet aircraft, and send impressively heroic astronauts deep into space, but before we are allowed to board commercial airline flights, we must first take off our shoes. The point, ironically, is not to make us more comfortable, but only to ensure that we don't blow up our fellow passengers. What is wrong with us? We do all want to be upbeat about the world. We are immediately turned off by anyone who should speak of any personal or collective misfortune. When a friend is asked mechanically "How are you?" both the expected and received answer are always the same: "I'm great." This is a push-button response, a viscerally disingenuous but superficially reassuring reply. It is born, of course, not of any authentic sense of contentment, but of an almost irrepressible need to appear successful. With this compulsive need in command, countless lemming-like individuals will drive themselves and their families into debilitating financial debt, solely because they have failed to look beyond the seductive tribal chimera of shiny new gadgets, designer drugs and colorfully appointed automobiles. Despite all of our evident technical progress, the veneer of human civilization remains razor thin. Oddly, perhaps, whole swaths of humankind remain dedicated to various ancient and atavistic sacrificial practices, a self-destructive allegiance that we may witness, more or less, worldwide. Here, ritualistic murders are reassuringly described as "holy war" or as "freedom fighting." Typically, however, this de facto dedication to conflict, terrorism and genocide is not an expression of immorality, or even foolishness. How can this be? The best answer lies in context. Our entire system of institutionalized international relations is itself rooted in a basic habitat of unrelenting violence. Shall we somehow expect to banish suffering from a system that was spawned in an endlessly-steaming cauldron of protracted conflict, a fearfully repetitive resort to force fittingly called by the seventeenth-century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes "a war of all against all?" But every outrage can have a patina. The pleasingly cleansing name that we assign to this bellum omnes contra omnes is “history.” In all current world politics, structural anarchy springs from the Peace of Westphalia, the canonical treaty of 1648 that ended the Thirty Years War, the last of Europe's major religious wars sparked by the Reformation. From Westphalia to the present still-precarious moment, international relations have been fashioned and determined by a changing "balance of power" (in the nuclear age, sometimes called a "balance of terror"), and by certain unavoidably associated conventions of war, terror, and genocide. Seeing requires distance. Up close and personal with statistics and calculations, entire civilizations now glance disinterestedly over mountains of fresh corpses and announce, usually without any apology, that "life is good." Set in motion by regularly shifting hordes that seem almost programmed to flee their own inwardness, our competing mass societies, both within nations and between them, greedily suck out the last residual marrows of human wisdom, reverence and compassion. Hope still exists, but, as we may see so often, it must sing softly, with circumspection, inconspicuously, almost sotto voce. Although counter-intuitive, the time for celebrating science, modernization, globalization and even new information technologies is already partially over. To survive together on an imperiled planet, all of us must energetically seek to rediscover an individual life that is detached from patterned conformance, cheap entertainments, crude commerce, shallow optimism and a "normally" contrived visage of happiness. With such a refreshingly candid expression of an awakened human spirit, we may yet learn something urgently useful and redemptive. We may learn, more precisely, that a common agony is far more important than astronomy; that a common despair is more serious than any financial “success”; and that common tears will inevitably have much deeper meanings than robotic smiles. In his landmark work, "The Decline of the West," first published during World War I, Oswald Spengler had inquired, "Can a desperate faith in knowledge free us from the nightmare of the grand questions?" It remains a noteworthy inquiry. Significantly, we may learn something about these critically "grand questions," and certain aptly corollary answers, from studying the ongoing chaos in world politics. We may finally learn that the most suffocating insecurities of life on earth can never be undone by improving global economics, by building larger missiles, by fashioning new international treaties, by encouraging "self-determination," by replacing one sordid regime with another, or even by "spreading democracy." We might learn, as well, that planet Earth and its residents still lack a tolerable future, not because we humans have been too slow to learn what has been taught, but because what we have been taught is altogether beside the point.
But it's the entrée of Iran and Saudi Arabia — each of these two geopolitical behemoths facing off on opposing sides — that is the newest wrinkle. And when these countries, the leaders of the two religious factions — Shia and Sunni, respectively — are battling each other, the risk of escalation grows exponentially. All this is adding up to a conflict with five dimensions, at least: Arabs vs. Persians, terrorists vs. regimes, terrorists vs. each other, Sunnis vs. Shias, democracy vs. authoritarian. Not to mention Russia, the United States, China and Europe, often pursuing conflicting aims. Anyone who confidently says they know where all of this ends is delusional. But here are a few tentative signposts: Iraq will be — already is — broken. Haider al-Abadi's government has tried valiantly to reunite Sunnis, Shias and Kurds, but to little avail, as Sunnis witness the growing influence of Shiite militia groups and Iran, as the Islamic State hangs on, and as the Kurds take on more of the fighting burden. It is very hard to imagine Iraq ever being whole again. The U.S. will not be in control. The problem is now too large and complex to be resolved by some big negotiation that settles all the conflicts and brings the region into some new alignment. What we now see is what we can expect — shifting and odd alliances of convenience geared to specific interests. So get used to odd couplings like the U.S. having a shared goal with Iran — that of destroying the Islamic State; this shared interest stands alongside continued disagreements, as the U.S. will continue to oppose Iran in Yemen and Syria and, of course, persist in negotiating nuclear matters. These seeming contradictions are the realities of the "new normal."
This week, Turkey’s Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu arrived in Washington, D.C., and his visit could not come at a more critical time: in the face of a deteriorating security situation in the Middle East. By all accounts, the most pressing issue to be discussed in each of the meetings on his agenda – from Congressional leadership to Secretary of State John Kerry – was how to strengthen the bilateral partnership to achieve a long-term plan for stability in the region, particularly as it relates to the ongoing conflict in Syria. Turkey and the U.S. have already taken positive first steps in this direction. In March, the Pentagon selected the first 400 Syrians who will take part in a joint training program on Turkish soil to help train moderate Syrian rebels fight the forces attempting to tear their country apart. The program, to which the U.S. Congress has pledged $500 million, expects to have 3,000 trained Syrians by the end of 2015 and a total of 5,000 by April 2016. However, both countries must ensure that this is the first step – and not the only step – in a longer-term solution. To achieve that end, it is becoming increasingly clear that without a comprehensive plan that addresses both ISIS and the regime of Bashar Al-Assad, realizing lasting peace in Syria will not be possible. In his destabilizing attempts to maintain his hold on power, often at the expense of his own people, Assad created the conditions that led to the rise of ISIS in Syria, trapping Syrians between the dual brutalities of a violent authoritarian regime and one of the most vicious terrorist organizations to emerge in recent memory. These conditions have led to one of the most dire refugee crises in more than 20 years, with Turkey alone welcoming an estimated 1.5 million Syrian refugees since the start of the conflict four years ago. Though Turkey and the U.S. have established an important framework for collaboration, there are a number of opportunities for enhanced coordination. Establishing a no-fly zone over Syria, as Turkey has recommended in the past, would allow the U.S.-led coalition to better protect and support the Syrian opposition from attacks by ISIS and Assad’s forces alike. Additionally, improved access to no-fly lists and the most up-to-date intelligence would help Turkey better monitor and detain the flow of people traveling across its borders. In recent months, increased intelligence-sharing has led to the apprehension of scores of European citizens attempting to cross through Turkey into Syria, but the expansion of these efforts will help to further restrict the flow of fighters to the terrorist group. Greater U.S.-Turkey cooperation and coordination to stabilize the region is nothing new. Turkey has long been an important U.S. ally in the region on everything from counterterrorism efforts to NATO operations. Since 2011, Turkey and the U.S. have co-chaired the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) to help combat the rise of extremism. One of NATO’s first members, Turkey takes a leadership role in the organization today, teaching its fellow NATO allies and select non-member states how to address various terrorism-related issues at its Center of Excellence Defense Against Terrorism (COE-DAT) in Ankara. Further, Turkey’s position on the front lines of the conflict in Syria means it is fully invested in working closely with all parties that are seeking a solution to the crisis. Minister Çavuşoğlu and Secretary Kerry have their work cut out for them. However, they had the opportunity this week to begin hammering out a plan that could set the region on a path toward calm and prosperity. Drawing on a history of collaboration and a shared vision of peaceful Middle East, both countries must find more ways to work together now to end the crisis in Syria and achieve lasting stability throughout the region.
Security, Alliances and Regional Relations Unlike many regimes elsewhere in the world, Jordan’s security concerns aren’t hypothetical. A revolutionary version of the Arab Spring may not have emerged from within Jordan, but the revolutions, uprisings and civil wars of the country’s neighbors have increasingly pressed at its borders. Certainly the most urgent security threat to Jordan is the rise of IS in parts of both Syria and Iraq. More alarming for Jordanians was the spread of the movement to Jordan’s very borders, as IS militants took multiple posts on the border with Syria and then claimed territories across the Iraqi border as well, in Iraq’s Anbar province. Jordan responded by reinforcing both borders with additional forces and armored units. The kingdom also strengthened its already extensive ties with the militaries of the United States and the United Kingdom, as well as with their respective intelligence services, the CIA and MI6. Early in the Arab Spring, before the rise of IS, Amman had already permitted the deployment of several hundred U.S. troops in northern Jordan, along with U.S. F-16 fighter jets and Patriot missile defense batteries. All of this was originally agreed upon with the threat of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s military—and especially his chemical weapons—in mind. Today, those same forces, now augmented by an additional squadron of six French fighter jets, are positioned against IS rather than Assad.
Yemen is undergoing a period of political transition following the signature in November 2011 of a Gulf Cooperation Council-brokered Initiative and UN transition plan by former President Saleh and the leaders of the main political parties in Yemen. This brought an end to months of political turmoil and committed Yemen to a two-year period of political transition. Under the Initiative, former President Saleh resigned from office and was succeeded by Abdo Rabbo Mansour Hadi following interim Presidential elections in February 2012. The process of political transition in Yemen is broadly on track but remains delicate and complex. Since his election President Hadi has demonstrated a commitment to tackling violent extremism in Yemen. In 2012 Yemeni security forces successfully regained territory held by Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP). AQAP represents a direct threat to the security of the United Kingdom and our interests overseas. We remain concerned about their continuing intent and capability to carry out attacks. We have seen a significant rise in the threat of kidnap, fuelled by successful ransom negotiations. An essential part of transition was start of the six-month National Dialogue Conference (NDC) on 18 March. The conference is paving the way for a new constitution. The final stage of transition will be full Presidential and Parliamentary elections in February 2014.
Some analysts, such as Colin Kahl, fear that any attack on Iran could lead to a broader regional war. 46 He suggests that, in response to Iranian and Hezbollah retaliation, Israel might return fire on Iran and invade Lebanon. Then Syria could come to the aid of its allies in Iran and Lebanon, leading to a broader regional war. In addition, Kahl fully admits that Iran would aim for a calibrated response, but he fears that the war would escalate be- cause the United States, not Iran, would be itching for a larger fight. This outcome is conceivable, but highly unlikely. Given prevailing conditions and presuming good strategy on America’s part, we would al- most certainly avoid it. It is doubtful that Syria would attack Israel as it is tied down in a bloody multiyear civil war and wouldn’t be looking to take on additional military obligations. Moreover, a wild Israeli response to Ira- nian retaliation is a near necessary condition for a broader regional war and, as I discuss below, the United States could restrain its ally to prevent this from occurring. Finally, what about the argument that we can’t trust Washington not to turn this into a major war? First, Kahl argues that it would be easier to destroy Iran’s conventional capabilities before they are dispersed in a conflict, so there are good tactical reasons to either begin with a massive military assault on Iran or not go at all. Therefore, as I stated above, he argues that if we get into a conflict with Iran, we should conduct a mas- sive bombing campaign right off the bat. But, as we also discussed above, strategy should drive tactics, not the other way around, and there are many more good strategic reasons to prefer a limited bombing campaign over a massive one. Second, Kahl argues that the United States might not be able to accept any Iranian retaliation because if Iran got in a lucky shot that happened to sink a US warship or killed a large number of US service personnel, any American president would feel overwhelming political pressure to re- spond. In making this argument, however, Kahl underestimates US military planning and our political leadership. As we will discuss below, US forces would go into force-protection mode in the days following a US strike. American service personnel, therefore, would hardly be sitting ducks for Iranian retaliation. Moreover, even if Iran happened to get in a lucky shot, the United States should show restraint. It would be in our interest to de- escalate the conflict, and the president could easily communicate this to the American people. He could make the case that through these soldiers’ heroic efforts we eliminated the greatest emerging threat to our national security. This is a truthful message and one that would be accepted by the American people. In sum, it is possible to imagine a limited US strike leading to a broader regional war, but just barely. It is much more likely that the conflict would stay limited.
A US strike on Iran’s nuclear facilities would be likely to lead to anti- American sentiment in certain corners of the world. Many Western Eu- ropeans will decry Washington as a rogue superpower operating outside the bounds of international law. The Arab street will protest against American imperialism and what they perceive as poor treatment of Muslims (after Iraq, Afghanistan, and Libya, this would, after all, be the fourth American war against a Muslim country in fifteen years). US rela- tions with other great powers would temporarily sour. Moscow and Bei- jing would certainly protest America’s muscle flexing without an explicit UNSCR. The response would not be as severe as many observers might fear, however. While Arab governments might lodge formal diplomatic protests to satisfy their populations, behind closed doors they would be congratu- lating American officials for eliminating the Iranian nuclear threat. The opposition of the great powers would also be mixed. Russia would likely be a vocal opponent of a US attack, but it is incredibly unlikely that, apart from diplomatic protests, it would do anything to intervene in the conflict, to aid Iran, or to retaliate against the United States. China would likely remain mute. I have traveled to Beijing four times over the past several years to discuss this issue with Chinese academic experts and government officials, and I have received the same message each time. First, China would prefer peace and stability in the Middle East, so that they can continue to purchase fossil fuels from the region to keep “China Inc.” running smoothly. Second, China sees this as a con- flict primarily between Tehran and Washington, and they have interests in maintaining good relations with both sides. Third, and related, they have no intention of getting into the middle of the conflict. Finally, depending on the circumstances leading up to the attack, many countries around the world, including NATO and non-NATO allies, and other regional partners might fully support a US preventive strike and even laud the United States for taking necessary steps to defend interna- tional peace and security. In this and other areas, therefore, the American strategy for conducting the attack will help to shape the magnitude of the downside risks.
The third major option for Iranian military retaliation would be to wreak havoc in the Persian Gulf. Iran could harass or attack American warships or commercial traffic in the body of water and could even at- tempt to close the Strait of Hormuz, a narrow waterway through which roughly 20 percent of the world’s traded oil flows. 38 To conduct such at- tacks, Iran could lay mines, conduct attacks from the shore with anti- ship missiles, and use its irregular IRGC navy, which maintains swarming fast-attack craft armed with machine guns and rockets, and Kilo-class and midget submarines. 39 Using such capabilities, Iran could send global oil prices soaring (a subject to which we will return below), and damage, if not sink, commercial vessels or US warships. It could also close the Strait, at least for a couple of weeks, before it would be reopened by American military power. 40 There is no doubt, however, that a large-scale use of force by Iran in the Persian Gulf would provoke a tough American response. The United States has already declared that if Iran attempts to close the Strait of Hor- muz, we will use force to reopen it. 41 The most likely outcome of such a conflict would be that, after two weeks of intense fighting, the Iranian navy would be at the bottom of the Persian Gulf, and the Strait of Hormuz would once again be safe for tanker traffic. In sum, in the worst-case scenario, Iran could launch hundreds of bal- listic missiles, some armed with chemical and biological weapons, at tar- gets in the Middle East, attempt to set off a wave of terror attacks against Israel and around the world, and close the Strait of Hormuz, leading to an intense, but short naval battle in the Persian Gulf. But, the more important question is not what could Iran do, but what would Iran do? The answer depends in part on the size of the US military operation against it. If the United States launched a massive attack on Iran and if Iran’s supreme leader believed, rightly or wrongly, that Washington was coming to downtown Tehran to overthrow his regime, he would have nothing left to lose and would therefore have no reason not to exercise his riskiest retaliatory options. If it meant the difference between losing his regime and his life, or possibly surviving to fight another day, it might even make sense to use chemical and biological weapons, close the Strait of Hormuz, and sponsor terror attacks on the US homeland. This is why it is never a good idea to put an opponent’s back against the wall in inter- national politics. If the United States conducted only a limited strike on Iran’s key nu- clear facilities, however, he would face a very different set of calculations. Indeed, it is important to understand that, in the event of a limited attack, Iran’s supreme leader would face his own strategic dilemma. On one hand, he would want to strike back hard at the aggressor to re-establish deter- rence internationally and save face domestically. On the other hand, he would not want to strike back too hard for fear of provoking an even larger war with the United States. Put yourself in the shoes of Iran’s supreme leader. Imagine that you woke up one morning to find out that your key nuclear facilities had been destroyed in an attack. You would have to do something. You would look like a wimp if you did nothing. But your primary goal is still regime sur- vival. In the aftermath of a limited attack, your regime and your military are still intact. The last thing you would want to do, therefore, is to pick a fight with the world’s only remaining superpower, the only state on Earth that could completely eviscerate your military and bring your regime to an end. As Karim Sadjadpour at the Carnegie Endowment of International Peace put it, “If they respond too little, they could lose face, and if they respond too much, they could lose their heads.” 42 In addition, as supreme leader, you would want to save back some mil- itary capabilities to deter and defend against future contingencies. If you shot off all of your ballistic missiles and picked a major naval battle with the United States that led to the destruction of your navy, you would be left completely and utterly defenseless. Moreover, you couldn’t really afford to close the Strait of Hormuz. You could certainly threaten to do so to send oil prices soaring and even harass and attack some ships passing through the area, but actually clos- ing the strait would be cutting off your nose to spite your face. First of all, you could only close the strait for a couple of weeks at most. Second, it would provoke a US response that would result in the destruction of your navy and coastal defenses. Third, if you closed the strait, you would be unable to export any of your own oil, so you would be cutting off a key export that contributes upward of 80 percent of all government revenues. 43 Fourth, you would be declaring war, not just on the United States, but on the entire world, which also depends on Middle Eastern oil. You would force every great power, including Russia and China, to align against you. For these reasons and others, it is almost certain that Iran’s supreme leader would aim for some kind of calibrated response. He would want to strike back, but not too hard. He would want to do enough to claim he had retaliated, but not so much that he would provoke a major war with the United States. Of course, it is always possible that he would misjudge and strike back too hard or not hard enough, but he would do his best to get it just right. By my estimate, therefore, Iran’s most likely retaliatory response might look something like this: four to five salvos (forty to fifty missiles) of con- ventionally armed ballistic missiles over the course of several days against military and civilian targets in the Middle East; several days of rocket at- tacks from Hamas and Hezbollah into Israel; sporadic Quds Force plots against American and Israeli soft targets around the world for months or even years after the attack; and the harassment of and attacks against navy and commercial vessels in the Persian Gulf, combined with empty threats to close the strait. 44
For those of us in the United States who believe that principled diplomatic engagement with Iran is the path to peace and stability in the Middle East -- a majority of the population, according to polls, but not necessarily a majority of Congress -- the answer is an unambiguous yes. If negotiators agree on the details of a preliminary agreement, then this deal will be a historic step forward. After all, this is more than just a nuclear agreement. It's more than just a way to usher Iran back into the international community. It's more even than a foundation stone for regional peace and stability (an aspiration that seems to become ever more elusive each day). The deal that negotiators are going down to the wire to hammer out ultimately represents a referendum on the Obama administration's overall foreign policy. On one side are those who favor long, patient, and often frustrating negotiations. On the other side are those who favor conflict, rollback, and even war. "We won't buy the same horse twice," opponents of negotiations with North Korea would often say when facing the prospect of Pyongyang offering once again to freeze its nuclear program in exchange for some package deal. When it comes to the Middle East, the horseshoe is on the other foot. We bought the warhorse once already with the disastrous campaign in Iraq. And that's exactly what the opponents of the Iran deal are offering again by portraying Iran as Nazi Germany and any Western leader that shrinks from attacking this evil entity as a latter-day Chamberlain figure. It's the argument of the full-page ad, recent op-eds by John Bolton in The New York Times and Joshua Muravchik in The Washington Post, the current Israeli government, a range of well-funded organizations in the United States, and a large number of congressional representatives that follow their lead. Fortunately, virtually the whole world is against them. The Devil and the Details The news out of Switzerland is that the negotiations between the P5+1 (the UN Security Council members plus Germany) and Iran have been extended by one day to reach a compromise. This would not be the final agreement. At best, it would be the outline of a framework agreement. Further negotiations would fill in the details before all sides would sign a final agreement by June 30. According to news accounts, disagreements remain over what Iran will retain under the terms of the deal. And some of these details may not be worked out in full until June. Two of the major sticking points have to do with centrifuges and stockpiles. To enrich uranium, Iran constructed approximately 18,000 centrifuges. The Iranian negotiators have argued that they need to retain a part of this complex for research and development, to generate medical isotopes, and so on. The original U.S. position was that Iran should get rid of them all. The compromise position has been 6,000 centrifuges, down from an estimated 10,000 that are currently in operation. Bomb-grade uranium requires enrichment to at least 90 percent. Iran had managed to accumulate a stockpile of enriched uranium in the 20-percent range. The agreement will probably set a ceiling on enrichment in the range of 5 percent. Iran also initially indicated it was willing to reduce its 17,000 pounds of material and relocate some of it outside the country, most likely to Russia. The stockpile could then be converted into fuel for a civilian nuclear energy program and shipped back to Iran for that purpose. The two sides haven't yet worked out an agreement on this issue. There has been much talk about "break-out" time. This is the time it would take for Iran to acquire enough highly enriched uranium to make one bomb. Negotiators have been talking about a one-year period for "break-out." This figure is misleading, however. It doesn't take into account weaponizing, testing, and miniaturizing for the purposes of constructing a warhead for a missile. In reality, any freeze on Iranian nuclear capabilities would extend by several years the date by which Iran could have a hypothetical nuclear weapon and the means to deliver it if it chose to pursue one. Moreover, it appears that Iran is now willing to consider an agreement for 15 years, a compromise from its initial position of only five years. Another sticking point is what Iran gets for its willingness to freeze and roll back its program. Tehran wants oil and financial sanctions lifted immediately. The United States favors phasing sanctions out and maintaining a "snap back" option so that sanctions go back into force if Iran is found to be out of compliance. Opponents of a deal have emphasized that Iran is an untrustworthy actor: the devil who speaks sweet words but plans bitter actions. Iran, they argue, has concealed its nuclear program in the past. It has not come clean with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). It has not abided by previous agreements. Iran has indeed concealed its program in the past. Just as other countries have done, like Israel for example, which still refuses to confirm its nuclear status. But it's critical to point out as well that, according to U.S. intelligence estimates in 2007, Iran abandoned its plan to pursue a nuclear weapon in 2003, and no evidence has emerged since then to suggest otherwise. However, Iran has continued with its nuclear program for purposes permitted under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). The current deal is being pursued not because the world trusts Iran on these issues, but because it doesn't trust Iran. Any nuclear deal will increase the level of scrutiny, inspections, and verification protocols. As for Iran's compliance with agreements in the past, it has abided by the 2013 interim agreement. As former National Security Council staffer Gary Sick points out, Iran also held to the Algiers Accord that ended the 1979 hostage standoff. Only through additional engagement with the IAEA will we obtain more information about the questions that remain unanswered about Iran's nuclear program in the past. The War Party Which brings us back to that full-page ad. It would be sensible to ignore such a screed if its arguments were not so commonplace in the public discourse, particularly among members of Congress. The organization behind the ad, the World Values Network, is an initiative of Orthodox rabbi Shmuley Boteach, who has received funding from hardline neo-con billionaire Sheldon Adelson. It's been pushing the "Iran is Nazi" meme for some time, and Israeli President Benjamin Netanyahu echoed this theme in his address to Congress earlier this year, where both Adelson and Boteach applauded from the front of the House gallery. But if the Iranian government were so intent on exterminating the world's Jews, which the ad maintains, it would probably have started already with the 10,000 or so Jews who live in Iran, the largest community in the Middle East outside of Israel. But the Jewish community in Iran is not under threat of death. Although the community does experience some discrimination, it also practices its religion freely. The ad goes on to make four demands. The first three involve adding elements to a nuclear agreement that have nothing to do with nuclear issues: end threats against Israel, stop terrorism, cease stoning of women and hanging of gays. I'd like to see progress on those issues, but in this context they are non-starters, designed simply to push negotiations off the rails. If an agreement on the nuclear question can be reached, then the United States and other countries can start to raise these issues and others, either as part of another set of negotiations or normalization talks. The fourth demand, to reject a deal that involves a "potentially catastrophic one-year-weapons-breakout period," is at least germane to the nuclear talks. But it too is a non-starter. The bottom line is that if Iran wants to pursue a nuclear weapons program, it will do so, just as Israel did, out of perceived national interest. If we stop negotiations -- or pursue the chimera of a "better deal" -- Iran will have the option of pushing for breakout as soon as it can. What's potentially catastrophic, in other words, is not to bring Iran into the web of verification protocols. Iran has influence throughout the Middle East. But it does not control five Middle Eastern capitals. This has been a popular right-wing meme, which Tom Cotton (R-AR) repeated when he appeared on Face the Nation and ticked off Tehran, Beirut, Baghdad, Damascus, and Sanaa. Iran certainly has influence in these places, but that does not amount to control. Given its close relationship with Saudi Arabia and other Gulf States, not to mention Egypt and Turkey, the United States could use the nuclear negotiations with Iran as a first step toward bridging the divide between Shiites and Sunnis in the region. No one expects that an agreement will trigger an immediate transformation inside Iran any more than the arms control agreements with the Soviet Union in the 1970s turned that country into a Scandinavian paradise. But a nuclear agreement will definitely strengthen the hands of reformers inside Iran. And as in the 1970s, the stakes are high and the choice is clear. We either talk ourselves away from the precipice, or we plunge headlong over it.
Last week, the Washington Post reported that "purchase orders obtained by nuclear researchers show an attempt by Iranian agents to buy 100,000 … ring-shaped magnets" and that such "highly specialized magnets used in centrifuge machines … [are] a sign that the country may be planning a major expansion of its nuclear program." As evidence, the Post's Joby Warrick cited a report authored by David Albright of the Institute for Science and International Security PDF (ISIS); dated Feb. 13, the report says that an Iranian firm, Jahan Tech Rooyan Pars Co., made an inquiry "posted on a Chinese commercial website … to buy 100,000 ring magnets." As Warrick goes on to explain: "it is unclear whether the attempt succeeded." There are serious deficiencies in both the Washington Post story and the assertions in the ISIS report. Given that issues of war and peace may hang on the veracity of such claims, the assertions warrant careful scrutiny. The magnets in question have many uses besides centrifuges and are not only, as Warrick describes them, "highly specialized magnets used in centrifuge machines." Such ceramic ring magnets are everyday items and have been used in loudspeakers, for example, for more than half a century. The ISIS report neglects to explain the many other applications for such ceramic ring magnets and jumps to the conclusion that the inquiry is surely related to Iran's nuclear program. Why ISIS does not offer alternate and more plausible applications of these unspecialized magnets is a puzzle. Such magnets are used in a variety of electronic equipment. For instance, one vendor outlines some of the various possible uses in speakers, direct current brushless motors, and magnetic resonance imaging equipment. This is not the first time ring magnets have surfaced in allegations related to centrifuge applications. Almost exactly a decade ago, as the United States was preparing to invade Iraq, then-director of the International Atomic Energy Agency Mohamed ElBaradei said that reports regarding similar ring magnets in Iraq were unrelated to centrifuges: With respect to reports about Iraq's efforts to import high-strength permanent magnets -- or to achieve the capability for producing such magnets -- for use in a centrifuge enrichment programme, I should note that, since 1998, Iraq has purchased high-strength magnets for various uses. Iraq has declared inventories of magnets of twelve different designs. The IAEA has verified that previously acquired magnets have been used for missile guidance systems, industrial machinery, electricity meters, and field telephones. Through visits to research and production sites, reviews of engineering drawings and analyses of sample magnets, IAEA experts familiar with the use of such magnets in centrifuge enrichment have verified that none of the magnets that Iraq has declared could be used directly for a centrifuge magnetic bearing. Robert Kelley, a nuclear engineer and former IAEA chief inspector and deputy leader of the agency's Iraq Action Team, told me last week that, between 2002 and 2003, his group "tracked similar ring magnets that Iraq was trying to procure (openly in insecure channels) and found they were for field telephones …. We got started with an ‘intelligence tip' and ran it to ground. Nothing whatsoever to do with centrifuges." The Iraq Survey Group also weighed in on this issue, saying PDF it "has not uncovered information indicating that the magnet production capability being pursued by Iraq beginning in 2000 was intended to support a gas centrifuge uranium enrichment program. … The declared use of the magnet production lines were for production of ring magnets in the Saham Saddam Missile and for ﬁeld telephones." A pair of ring magnets is used in the top suspension bearing of the IR-1 gas centrifuges. As others have already noted, it seems to make little sense to order ceramic magnets that are, as ISIS describes, "almost exactly" the right dimensions. If one is intending to purchase 100,000 ceramic ring magnets for critical high-speed centrifuge applications, why not order them exactly the right size? Ceramics are almost impossible to machine due to their brittle nature and are generally ordered to the precise specifications desired. Albright's suggestion in the ISIS report PDF that "some minor re-design would be necessary of the top end cap and top magnetic bearing of the IR-1 [centrifuge] design but these are seen as fairly trivial" could be correct. But why would a purchaser wish to redesign, re-machine, and re-test tens of thousands of centrifuges, instead of ordering the correctly sized part in the first place? Although ISIS redacted measurements in the English translation of the inquiry to purchase the 100,000 magnets, it did not redact them from the original shown on the last page of the ISIS report PDF. The original clearly states that the magnets have "BHmax Min 3MGo"; MGo is shorthand for mega-Gauss Oersted, a measure of the magnetic energy stored in the magnets. (B and H are, respectively, the magnetic flux density and the magnetic field strength.) This value is substantially less than the 10 MGo trigger level given for centrifuge applications in Annex 3 of the Notifications of Exports to Iraq mandated by United Nations Security Council Resolution 1051 (1996). Although magnets with an energy product of 3 MGO could be consistent with applications in suspension bearings of the older IR-1 centrifuges, they are also consistent with a host of other applications. Curiously, the inquiry to the China-based company that is shown on the last page of the ISIS report PDF is very casual and overt. The alleged inquiry states, "Dear Sir We are a great factory in south of Iran and for our new project we need 100.000 pcs Ferrite Barium strontium ring magnet . … we would like buy from you [sic] company. We should be glad if you supply this magnet for us." Presumably, an attempt to source 100,000 parts related to Iran's controversial and often secretive nuclear program would not be conducted quite so openly. Not only would such an overt attempt at sourcing the ring magnets be inconsistent with the secrecy surrounding Iran's nuclear program; it would also be at odds with procurement best-practices, for several reasons. First, such a large order would likely drive up the market price and perhaps even signal to the supplier to choke off the supply, in hopes of obtaining a better price later. Also, before indicating that such a huge order may be in the works, a serious engineering operation would likely obtain a few sample magnets to formally qualify them. Such an order would, more reasonably, be directed to the manufacturer or direct supplier (in this case, apparently, a rather small Indian firm, Ferrito Plastronics), rather than to a Chinese middleman. Obtaining 100,000 ceramic ring magnets without sample qualification would be highly risky and unprofessional. It would be inconsistent with Iran's generally excellent record in systems management and engineering PDF involving a range of technologies and industries. Both the Washington Post story and the ISIS report on which it is based repeatedly call the inquiry a "purchase order" or "order." This is a mischaracterization. The evidence presented (Figures 3 and 4 in the ISIS report) merely shows a web inquiry as to whether the supplier has any interest in discussing the question further. There is no mention of money, delivery dates, or letters of credit. All of these items would be part of a formal purchase order. The apparent manufacturer or supplier of the magnets in question, Ferrito Plastronics, is evidently a "tiny firm in a dark alley in Chennai's electronic spare parts hub on Meeran Sahib Street." According to the Times of India, "the Chennai firm does supply magnets. But these, avers company proprietor Bala Subramanian, are the ones used in loudspeakers, coils, and medical equipment. Besides these, there are decorative magnets for fridges." The proprietor states that his monthly turnover is slightly less than $2,000. Such a firm would seem unlikely to be the optimal source for 100,000 high-quality centrifuge ring magnets. Although the purpose of the alleged inquiry is subject to interpretation, it seems unlikely to be related to Iran's nuclear program. Assuming that the request to buy 100,000 magnets is genuine, it would be consistent with, for instance, an Iranian loudspeaker company interested in obtaining such ceramic ring magnets. That is just one possible hypothesis, of course, but it seems a better explanation of the alleged inquiry than the suggestion of an overt attempt by Iran's nuclear program to source 100,000 of the wrong-sized ceramic ring magnets from a tiny Indian company via a Chinese middleman. It is worth noting that the best Western intelligence concludes that no nuclear weapons work is going on in Iran right now, and that Iran is not an imminent nuclear threat. James Clapper, the US director of national intelligence, has confirmed PDF that he has "a high level of confidence" that no nuclear weaponization work is underway in Iran. Outgoing Defense Secretary Leon Panetta has also weighed in: "Are [Iranians] trying to develop a nuclear weapon? No." And in an interview for a 2011 article in the New Yorker, ElBaradei said PDF that he did not see "a shred of evidence" that Iran was pursuing the bomb after 2003, adding, "I don't believe Iran is a clear and present danger. All I see is the hype about the threat posed by Iran." Given these expert assessments, reporters and editors should raise the bar for the evidence underpinning stories of alleged Iranian nuclear weapons-related work. This Washington Post article is the second in about three months to make serious unsubstantiated claims regarding Iran's nuclear program. In the previous story, the Associated Press used flimsy evidence to suggest that Iran may be working on a nuclear bomb. Clearly, the media reporting on Iran's controversial nuclear program have a duty to do a better job of vetting evidence and sources. Similarly, non-governmental organizations that are supposed to supply unbiased expert advice should strive to provide professional analyses that lay out all possible explanations and do not jump to unwarranted conclusions. We have all been witness to what may happen when a fictional threat is spun up over non-existent weapons of mass destruction -- the result isn't pretty. When news reports cast thin evidence in hyperbolic terms, the public is invited to run rampant with speculation about Iran's nuclear program. At a time when military action is apparently being seriously contemplated, the international community needs to look past trivialities, focus on the facts, and find realistic opportunities for ending the Iranian nuclear standoff.
That new market smell is in the air. Tehran’s hotel ballrooms are filling up with visiting delegations of European and American investors who hear tea-fueled assurances of long-term profits before shuttling off to the tourist sights in Shiraz and Isfahan. The London-based asset management firm Charlemagne Capital recently announced a partnership with Iran’s Turquoise Partners, an equity fund that invests in the Tehran Stock Exchange. If Charlemagne is knocking at the door, what’s next? Alexander the Great LLC? As a nuclear deal with Iran moves closer to realization, foreign business is exploring how to cash in. Yet all of this attention is not as new as we think. While sanctions most severely affected the economy after 2011, Iran’s neighbors in Asia never fully cut off economic ties, no matter how much U.S. arm-twisting occurred behind closed doors. Turkey and Iran recently implemented a tariff-reduction agreement to increase cross-border trade. Chinese cellphones pour over the border along with Pakistani cigarettes and Korean washing machines. Iraq’s southern cities are being reconstructed with Iranian steel and cement. The Emirati conglomerate Majid al-Futtain operates a garish hypermarket in Tehran’s western suburbs. During trips to Iran between 2011 and 2013, even with European capital flight, I’ve run into Indian petrochemical executives in Ahvaz, Chinese construction honchos in Yazd and Russian mining magnates in Tabriz. Even with the cordon sanitaire of sanctions, then, Iran’s market autarky was overstated. One of the ironies of the Mahmoud Ahmadinejad era (2005-2013) was that the polarizing president opened the borders to consumer imports at the same time his government pumped unprecedented levels of cash into the economy. In 2006, my Turkish tailor in downtown Tehran asked me to bring a hard-to-get premium brand olive oil from Istanbul for his wife’s beauty routine. In 2011, I could pick up the same olive oil at any Tehran corner bodega. According to Iran’s Central Bank, the absolute value of imports of goods and services, controlling for inflation, rose every year from 2005 to 2011 and then finally began to shrink, but even in 2012/13 the total value was higher than a decade prior. This wasn’t necessarily healthy for the economy, however, and the giddy bubble of consumption and speculation made the ensuing crash and recession over the past three years all the more painful. Faced with expulsion from global financial markets, an embargo of oil exports and a run on the currency, the Ahmadinejad government countered international pressure with tactical bluster rather than coherent strategy, while his allies went to defeat at the polls.
American and European energy and banking sanctions continue to hammer business. The optimism that a nuclear deal would soon see sanctions lifted has largely evaporated. Domestic investment has stalled. Several state-owned banks are said to be close to collapse. Efforts to circumvent sanctions have made an already corrupt country worse: Transparency International, a Berlin-based anti-corruption lobby, ranks Iran a lowly 136th out of 175 countries in its index for 2014. Foreign business visitors continue to pop in for tea, but the numbers have dropped sharply in the past quarter, according to a European airline manager in the capital. Other indicators also suggest that hope is fading: the Tehran stock exchange slipped 21% last year after surging by 131% in 2013. Almost the only bright spot is tourism, with numbers up by 35%, according to the government’s latest figures. Mr Rohani has placed much store on the nuclear talks, but his officials seem to be hedging their bets. Until recently many said they wanted to do less business with China—which has happily kept on buying oil—saying it makes shoddy goods, breaks its promises and lacks Western technology. Now such criticism is rarer. American officials, for their part, are diligently tightening the screws. When a large delegation of French businessmen returned from Tehran last year, many were warned by the American embassy in Paris that they should tread carefully and not sign preliminary contracts in Iran if they wanted to retain access to American financial markets. A group of Germans received a similar warning a few months later. The thought of having their dollars frozen under American banking sanctions, or of being locked out of America’s capital markets altogether, has cooled enthusiasm for doing business in Iran.
Today it is no longer self-evident that Israel has the capacity to effectively strike Iran’s nuclear installations. Through deed and word, the White House has made clear repeatedly that it prefers a nuclear- armed Iran to an Israeli strike to prevent Iran from becoming a nuclear power. As it has done several times over the past six years, the Obama administration can be expected to continue to use the many means it has at its disposal to prevent Israel from launching such an attack. Moreover, with each passing day Iran’s nuclear sites become more and more difficult to attack successfully. And Iran’s technological capabilities have vastly expanded over the past decade. Today Iran can replace damaged or destroyed centrifuges much faster than it could in the past. Iran’s ally North Korea has also expanded its nuclear capabilities and its arsenal. Pyongyang is ready and willing to sell Iran replacements for any nuclear components that might be destroyed in a military strike. Finally, Iran recognizes the implications of growing European and US hostility toward the Jewish state. It knows that if Israel openly attacks Iran and sets back its nuclear weapons program, the EU and the US will punish Israel, and express sympathy with Iran, and so give the Iranians cover to rapidly rebuild any lost capabilities. Iran’s achievement of breakout capacity and seemingly unfettered path to a bomb in the basement, and its consequent rise to the position of regional hegemony, is the greatest Israeli foreign policy failure since the 1993 Oslo Accord with the PLO
Israel does have the military capability to strike the Islamic Republic’s nuclear installations. Nevertheless, for several reasons, it is very unlikely that Israel will unilaterally carry out strikes against Iran’s nuclear installations. First of all, Israeli leaders are cognizant of the fact that any strikes aimed at Iran’s nuclear installations will not completely thwart Iran’s nuclear program. The strikes might turn the clock a few years back and postpone the process for Iran to become a nuclear state or build an atomic bomb, but an Israeli attack will give further incentive to Iran to pursue its nuclear ambitions with more determination. Even several senior Israeli security and military officials have admitted that any Israeli attack on Iran will boost Iran’s determination to build a bomb, and will endanger Israel’s own survival. Second, an external Israeli attack on Iran will rally the Iranian people behind their government for their right of nuclear enrichment. It will also grant the hardliners firmer motive to reach the nuclear threshold with full-fledged speed. Thirdly, the Islamic Republic will likely decline to cooperate with the international community as well as pull out of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. As a result, the unintended repercussions and negative consequences of an Israeli attack- such as Iran becoming more determined to accelerate its nuclear program- do outweigh the delay that the strikes might impose on Iran’s nuclear program. Difficult to predict While it might be easy to start a war or carry out strikes, it is almost impossible to know where the war will head afterwards. In case Iran responds militarily, few strikes can turn the region into a conflagration affecting many lives of ordinary civilians, the Gulf (with the price of oil skyrocketing and price of gasoline increasing in Western countries), and impacting the security of other regional countries. The war can not only endanger regional security, but also Israel’s own security, and drag in global powers, including the United States and Russia. According to polls, many Israeli citizens are against their country attacking Iran unilaterally. Finally, although Israeli leaders believe that the Obama administration has not been firm enough in terms of thwarting Iran’s ambition to reach a nuclear threshold, Israel is in fact dependent on the United States when it comes to dealing with Iran’s nuclear program
Many dismiss this talk as bluster, however. Over at Bloomberg View, for instance, Jeffrey Goldberg argues that the nuclear deal has “boxed-in Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu so comprehensively that it's unimaginable Israel will strike Iran in the foreseeable future.” Eurasia Group's Cliff Kupchan similarly argued: “The chance of Israeli strikes during the period of the interim agreement drops to virtually zero.” Although the interim deal does further reduce Israel’s propensity to attack, the truth is that the likelihood of an Israeli strike on Iran’s nuclear facilities has always been greatly exaggerated. There are at least five reasons why Israel isn’t likely to attack Iran. 1. You Snooze, You Lose First, if Israel was going to strike Iran’s nuclear facilities, it would have done so a long time ago. Since getting caught off-guard at the beginning of the Yom Kippur War in 1973, Israel has generally acted proactively to thwart security threats. On no issue has this been truer than with nuclear-weapon programs. For example, Israel bombed Saddam Hussein’s program when it consisted of just a single nuclear reactor. According to ABC News, Israel struck Syria’s lone nuclear reactor just months after discovering it. The IAEA had been completely in the dark about the reactor, and took years to confirm the building was in fact housing one. Contrast this with Israel’s policy toward Iran’s nuclear program. The uranium-enrichment facility in Natanz and the heavy-water reactor at Arak first became public knowledge in 2002. For more than a decade now, Tel Aviv has watched as the program has expanded into two fully operational nuclear facilities, a budding nuclear-research reactor, and countless other well-protected and -dispersed sites. Furthermore, America’s extreme reluctance to initiate strikes on Iran was made clear to Israel at least as far back as 2008. It would be completely at odds with how Israel operates for it to standby until the last minute when faced with what it views as an existential threat. 2. Bombing Iran Makes an Iranian Bomb More Likely Much like a U.S. strike, only with much less tactical impact, an Israeli air strike against Iran’s nuclear facilities would only increase the likelihood that Iran would build the bomb. At home, Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei could use the attack to justify rescinding his fatwa against possessing a nuclear-weapons program, while using the greater domestic support for the regime and the nuclear program to mobilize greater resources for the country’s nuclear efforts. Israel’s attack would also give the Iranian regime a legitimate (in much of the world’s eyes) reason to withdraw from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and kick out international inspectors. If Tehran’s membership didn’t even prevent it from being attacked, how could it justify staying in the regime? Finally, support for international sanctions will crumble in the aftermath of an Israeli attack, giving Iran more resources with which to rebuild its nuclear facilities. 3. Helps Iran, Hurts Israel Relatedly, an Israeli strike on Iran’s nuclear program would be a net gain for Iran and a huge loss for Tel Aviv. Iran could use the strike to regain its popularity with the Arab street and increase the pressure against Arab rulers. As noted above, it would also lead to international sanctions collapsing, and an outpouring of sympathy for Iran in many countries around the world. Meanwhile, a strike on Iran’s nuclear facilities would leave Israel in a far worse-off position. Were Iran to respond by attacking U.S. regional assets, this could greatly hurt Israel’s ties with the United States at both the elite and mass levels. Indeed, a war-weary American public is adamantly opposed to its own leaders dragging it into another conflict in the Middle East. Americans would be even more hostile to an ally taking actions that they fully understood would put the U.S. in danger. Furthermore, the quiet but growing cooperation Israel is enjoying with Sunni Arab nations against Iran would evaporate overnight. Even though many of the political elites in these countries would secretly support Israel’s action, their explosive domestic situations would force them to distance themselves from Tel Aviv for an extended period of time. Israel’s reputation would also take a further blow in Europe and Asia, neither of which would soon forgive Tel Aviv. 4. Israel’s Veto Players Although Netanyahu may be ready to attack Iran’s nuclear facilities, he operates within a democracy with a strong elite structure, particularly in the field of national security. It seems unlikely that he would have enough elite support for him to seriously consider such a daring and risky operation. For one thing, Israel has strong institutional checks on using military force. As then vice prime minister and current defense minister Moshe Yaalon explained last year: “In the State of Israel, any process of a military operation, and any military move, undergoes the approval of the security cabinet and in certain cases, the full cabinet… the decision is not made by two people, nor three, nor eight.” It’s far from clear Netanyahu, a fairly divisive figure in Israeli politics, could gain this support. In fact, Menachem Begin struggled to gain sufficient support for the 1981 attack on Iraq even though Baghdad presented a more clear and present danger to Israel than Iran does today. What is clearer is that Netanyahu lacks the support of much of Israel’s highly respected national security establishment. Many former top intelligence and military officials have spoken out publicly against Netanyahu’s hardline Iran policy, with at least one of them questioning whether Iran is actually seeking a nuclear weapon. Another former chief of staff of the Israeli Defense Forces told The Independent that, “It is quite clear that much if not all of the IDF [Israeli Defence Forces] leadership do not support military action at this point…. In the past the advice of the head of the IDF and the head of Mossad had led to military action being stopped.” 5. A Deal is Better Than No Deal Finally, Israel won’t attack Iran because it is ultimately in its interests for the US and Iran to reach an agreement, even if it is a less than an ideal one. To begin with, an agreement is the only way to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons short of an invasion and occupation of the country. Moreover, Israel would benefit both directly and indirectly from a U.S.-Iranian nuclear deal and especially larger rapprochement. Israel would gain a number of direct benefits from a larger warming of U.S.-Iranian relations, which a nuclear deal could help facilitate. Iran currently pays no costs while benefiting significantly from its anti-Israeli tirades and actions. A rapprochement with the U.S. would force Iranian leaders to constrain their anti-Israeli rhetoric and actions, or risk losing their new partner. While Israel and Iran might not enjoy the same relationship they did under the Shah or the first decade of the Islamic Republic, a U.S.-allied Iran would be much less of a burden for Israel. History is quite clear on this point: U.S. Middle Eastern allies—notable Egypt under Sadat—have been much less hostile to the Jewish state than countries that have been U.S. adversaries. Tel Aviv would also benefit indirectly from a U.S.-Iran nuclear deal and possible rapprochement. That’s because either of these agreements would spark panic in Sunni Arab capitals. For the foreseeable future, then, Israel would enjoy some breathing room, which would obtain as these governments would be preoccupied with Iran for the foreseeable future. Indeed, just the possibility of an interim nuclear deal between the U.S. and Iran has created rumors of Saudi Arabia seeking tighter cooperation with Israel. For these reasons, the interim nuclear deal has made it less likely that Israel will attack Iran. That being said, the possibility of an Israeli attack on Iran was already remote long before Iran and the P5+1 held their talks in Geneva last month.
Iran learned from Israel’s successful June 1981 attack on Saddam Hussein’s Osirak nuclear facility, which followed a failed attack by Iran the previous September. Osirak was a single location, above ground, and not well defended, and Israel was able to severely cripple Saddam’s nuclear program with one strike. Iran has no such single-point, high vulnerability target, and Warden notes that Tehran has “done a nice job of camouflaging [its nuclear program], concealing it, putting it deep underground.” Israel can hit some important targets in Iran, but in Warden’s opinion not enough of them to be truly effective. Israeli forces would not be able to neutralize a sufficient number of facilities in a short enough period of time to guarantee success, and would not be able to sustain an air campaign for weeks or even days. Combat losses, international political opposition and Iranian military responses, both directly and through Tehran’s network of terrorist surrogates, would impose a time limit on any Israeli operation. Warden’s take is that, given these factors, it is unlikely Israel would mount a unilateral attack unless the situation was desperate. Even then, he has “zero optimism” an Israeli-only strike would be successful, short of Jerusalem using nuclear weapons, which opens a different, more dangerous discussion
Two years ago, Daniel Levy made the case that Netanyahu was too risk-averse as a politician to do anything as hazardous and potentially disastrous as starting a war with Iran. That seemed very plausible at the time, and I still find it persuasive. It has never made much sense that the Israeli government would launch an attack on Iran’s nuclear facilities. Even if Netanyahu were inclined to do this, which he reportedly  isn’t, starting a preventive war against Iran wouldn’t prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons. On the contrary, a foreign attack would probably make the acquisition of such weapons a priority for the Iranian government. Especially if one believes the worst about the Iranian government’s intentions, it would be the height of folly to take action that would practically guarantee that Iran gets a nuclear arsenal, and that is what an Israeli or U.S. attack would do. The more important reason why such an attack didn’t make much sense is that it isn’t necessary for Israeli security. Even if Iran acquired nuclear weapons, Israel would have a much larger nuclear arsenal with which it would deter unconventional attacks. If Netanyahu is also risk-averse enough that he doesn’t want to take reckless military action against Iran, so much the better for all involved.
K, I admit it. I thought this framework was going to suck. Actually, it’s not bad. My main concern all along was that the P5+1 countries (technically the E3/EU+3; congratulations if you know the difference) were too focused on “breakout time” — imposing arbitrary limits on Iran’s centrifuge program to ensure that if Iran used its known nuclear infrastructure, it would take at least a year to build a bomb. The bigger worry about Iran’s nuke program, I always thought, was unknown nuclear infrastructure, such as any hidden centrifuge sites.
The Indian economy is much more resilient to external shocks now than was last year, a top IMF official has said, attributing this to a series of administrative decisions and policy measures taken by the Union Government. "We see India much more resilient than they were about the middle of last year to external shocks, Paul Cashin, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Assistant Director of the Asia and Pacific Department told reporters during a conference call. "In recent months, India has taken very substantial measures to narrow both its external and fiscal imbalances, tighten monetary policy, move forward on structural reforms, and address aspects of this market volatility," Cashin said in response to a question during the call.
Projecting a better growth outlook for India, global rating agency Moody’s today said the country’s economic growth will be 5 per cent this year and accelerate further in 2015. “The growth outlook is more robust for India and Indonesia. For both countries, we forecast GDP growth of around 5 per cent this year, rising to around 5.5-6 per cent in 2015,” Moody’s said in its report ‘Global Macro Outlook 2014-15: Summer Lull: Subdued, But Less Risky Global Growth Likely’. The higher growth projection for India comes against the backdrop of a new government coming to power with single majority for the first time in three decades. However, the rating agency said India’s growth estimates are still way lower than the levels seen before global crisis. “For India in particular, the projected growth rates are still significantly below pre-crisis and well short of the new government’s target to raise growth to 7-8 per cent by 2017-18,” the report said. Moody’s also said that India and Indonesia would see “more resilient GDP growth”.
Rising tension at the Line of Control (LoC) between India and Pakistan is putting in question the widely-held assumption that their conflict will not escalate to an all-out conventional or even nuclear war. International concern has extended to the US, previously resistant to mediating in the Kashmir dispute. This is at the heart of the existential rivalry between the two states. Kashmir has become so symbolically significant to both India and Pakistan that they are beset by zero-sum thinking, though a resolution would potentially put an end to their hostilities. In the current context that seems unlikely. At the brink Past military crises between India and Pakistan remained at the brink of all-out war because of international pressure and, most importantly, the deterrent value of nuclear weapons. Rationally, since India is conventionally stronger than Pakistan, the latter would not think of escalating the crisis; and since India is a democracy, it would act out the associated values, engaging Pakistan in peaceful dialogue. But the growing tensions are crowding out rational argument. A primordialist view of the conflict, tracing back to 1947, is exacerbated by media posturing on both sides. This blame game mobilises public opinion in alignment with the nationalist notions of the two states. The proliferation of nuclear weapons has on the face of it given more strength to Pakistan to flex its muscles, including engaging in sub-conventional warfare with India. And for all its democratic self-image India lacks any open and goal-oriented strategy—seeing in its absence security lapses, intelligence failures, an inability to prevent terror attacks and a disconnect between civilian and military leadership. Indian security agencies are unable to join the dots at the right time to prevent infiltrations and attacks--repeatedly in the Samba region of Jammu at the LoC and in four synchronised episodes in Kashmir during the recent assembly elections—despite joint mechanisms. While India and Pakistan can join hands in preventing such attacks, a cause of serious concern for both, the escape route for the former in the event of failure is to blame everything on the latter, increasing the trust deficit between the two. In default of a strategy, India tries to curb resistance in Kashmir by sending in more soldiers and paramilitary troops, in counter-insurgency operations for which they are not trained—as even the forces involved acknowledge—and in which they thus cannot be expected to behave in a professional manner. A post-colonial mindset, of dealing with ‘enemies’ by hook or by crook, is applied. This has inevitably heightened alienation in the Kashmir Valley, spiralling via further human-rights violations. Pakistan’s internal condition is meanwhile deteriorating. Tehrik-i-Taliban (TTP) has created mayhem by stoking sectarian violence in various regions. Even if the Pakistan army has infiltrated the Taliban ranks, this has not led to a cessation of hostilities. This chaotic context only adds further volatility to rising tension at the LoC. And the posture of India seems more aggressive now, under the Hindu-nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the wider National Democratic Alliance coalition it leads—they having consistently criticised the former centre-left, United Progressive Alliance government as ‘soft’ on Pakistan. Though the prime minister, Narendra Modi, initially showed a willingness to engage, India immediately called off talks between foreign ministers when the Pakistan high commissioner met the hardline Kashmiri separatist Syed Ali Shah Geelani ahead of them. After an hiatus caused by the worst floods to hit Kashmir in years, ever since there has been escalation from both sides. Fault-lines The occupation continues, regardless of governmental change, because all the political parties in New Delhi share the sentiment that Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of India. The elections in the state however showed a clear polarisation along ethno-religious fault-lines: the regional parties (the National Conference and People’s Democratic Party) predominated in the autonomist Kashmir Valley but the BJP made almost a clean sweep of the more integrationist Jammu, while Congress did likewise in the relatively depopulated Ladakh. With the parties unable to form a new administration, governor’s rule was imposed on 9 January. The BJP has succeeded in dividing the Muslims who predominate in the Kashmir Valley while uniting the Hindus in Hindu-majority Jammu. This has made the partition of the state into the three areas almost palpable. Such a scenario could only lead to further radicalisation of the valley youth, with every possibility of India and Kashmir being thrown back to the violent 1990s. Amid US withdrawal from Afghanistan and Pakistan’s domestic deterioration, any complacency as to reason prevailing would be misplaced. Bear in mind that the BJP manifesto pledged the abrogation of article 370 of the Indian constitution, which ascribes special status to Jammu and Kashmir—the only saving grace by which India can assert the legitimacy of its continuing rule.
Most people think that, since the end of the Cold War, chances that a nuclear war will break out are slim to none. Though some nervousness has surfaced since the Ukraine crisis, it's true that, barring an accident, the United States and Russia are unlikely to attack each other with nuclear weapons. Southeast Asia is another matter, as Gregory Koblentz warns in a report for the Council of Foreign Relations titled Strategic Stability in the Second Nuclear Age. Interviewed about the report by Deutsche Welle, Koblentz pointed out: "The only four countries currently expanding their nuclear arsenals are China, India, Pakistan and North Korea." China, for example, is developing mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles to prevent its stationery ICBMs from becoming sitting ducks, as well as submarines capable of launching ballistic missiles. Meanwhile, by 2020, Pakistan could have enough nuclear material to build 200 nuclear weapons, about as many as Great Britain currently has. Koblentz told Deutsche Welle: Altogether, Pakistan has deployed or is developing eleven different nuclear delivery systems including ballistic missiles, cruise missiles, and aircraft. As if terrorism, such as the Mumbai attacks of 2008, and territorial disputes, such as over Jammu and Kashmir, don't make relations between Pakistan and India volatile enough, a new element has been introduced. Pakistan is now seeking to develop low-yield tactical nuclear weapons (as opposed to strategic ― the big ones) to compensate for its inferiority to India in conventional weapons and numbers of armed forces. Koblentz told Deutsche Welle: Since the conventional military imbalance between India and Pakistan is expected to grow thanks to India's larger economy and higher gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate, Pakistan's reliance on nuclear weapons to compensate for its conventional inferiority will likely be an enduring feature of the nuclear balance in South Asia. The Danger of Tactical Nuclear Weapons What makes tactical weapons so dangerous is that, by blurring the distinction between nuclear and conventional weapons, they turn nuclear weapons from unthinkable to thinkable. Equally as dangerous, Koblentz explains: The introduction of tactical nuclear weapons may lead Pakistan to loosen its highly centralized command and control practices. Due to their short-ranges (the Nasr/Hatf-IX has a range of about 60 kilometers), these types of weapons need to be deployed close to the front-lines and ready for use at short-notice. Thus are lower-ranking officers granted "greater authority and capability to arm and launch nuclear weapons" which "raises the risk of unauthorized actions during a crisis." Another risk ... is inadvertent escalation. There is the potential for a conventional conflict to escalate to the nuclear level if the commander of a forward-deployed, nuclear-armed unit finds himself in a 'use it or lose it' situation and launches the nuclear weapons under his control before his unit is overrun."
LONDON: A British report has warned that climate change could trigger violent conflict in India - similar to the Arab Spring where climate change, drought, water mismanagement and food prices contributed to the outbreak of civil unrest. The Global Sustainability Institute at Anglia Ruskin University in Cambridge has said that water availability is closely tied to food production and with India's population expected to reach 1.4 billion by 2050, the country could face a "perfect storm" of challenges. The report specifically looks at the specific socio-political, economic, cultural and environmental characteristics of the Cauvery and Indus catchments and the potential for both climate change and scarcity of natural resources to destabilise social and political systems. The experts say "the natural resource, environmental, economic, political and demographic characteristics of the Cauvery River basin appear to be consistent with a risk of violent conflict. The Indus River Basin has a population of more than a quarter of a billion people, some of the world's lowest Human Development Indicator scores and geopolitics characterised by international, subnational, and local conflict. Straddling both Northern India and Pakistan the Indus river basin is affected by water stresses due to poor water management, inefficient agricultural practices, soil salinization, inadequate infrastructure, variability in water availability and water pollution. To meet its growing population and surging energy demand, and to bring electricity to the more than 400 million Indians living without it, the government of India plan to build 292 dams throughout the Indian Himalayas". "Pakistan holds India's construction of dams responsible for the country's water shortages," the report says. \
NEW DELHI: Asia is facing the brunt of climate change and will see severe stress on water resources and food-grain production in the future, increasing the risk of armed conflict among India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and China, the latest report of a UN panel has warned. UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, in its report assessing impacts of climate change on human health, settlements and natural resources released on Monday, carried a dire warning. "The worst is yet to come," it said, if no measures are taken to curb the ill-effects of global warming. India, like other developing economies, may lose up to 1.7% of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) if the annual mean temperature rises by 1 degree Celsius compared to pre-industrialization level, hitting the poor the most. The report also predicts an increase in extreme weather events such as last year's flash floods in Uttarakhand and cyclone Phailin in Odisha if steps are not taken to control the rise in temperature. "Nobody on this planet is going to be untouched by the impacts of climate change," R K Pachauri, IPCC chairman said while making the report public in Yokohama, Japan.
The report points to India as a case study and says "India is the world's largest democracy with a decentralised political system and strong state powers. India has experienced rapid economic growth over the past 15 years, yet despite economic success India is a country of contrasts; where vast wealth coexists with abject poverty. The level of inequality between the wealthy elite and the numerous poor has led to the concept of "two India's", with the latter threatening prosperity and growth of the former. In a country of 1.19 billion people, 48 Indians made it on to the Forbes' 2012 list of billionaires, while in 2009-10 30% of the population were living on less than $0.44 per day in rural areas and $0.56 per day in urban areas". "India is crisscrossed by numerous rivers yet rapid economic and population growth means demand for water is growing faster than available supply. The result is falling per capita freshwater resources. The country is also experiencing high levels of baseline water stress driven by its growing populations, growing middle class population and therefore growing domestic demand for rice, wheat and sugar". "Indian water withdrawals are expected to reach 1,195 billion m3 by 2030 which is a 50% increase from 2012 withdrawals. Despite national water withdrawals being below the total potential water resource available in India individual river basins face physical water scarcity. This includes agriculturally important basins, such as the Indus, Ganges, Cauvery and Krishna. Together these basins represent two-thirds of the total irrigated area," the report added.
Pakistani and Indian officials met earlier this month to discuss cross-border energy cooperation, perhaps signaling that the new government in Islamabad aims to follow through on plans its predecessor spent years talking about. That would be good for both countries. ¶ Nawaz Sharif's Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) party swept Pakistan's parliamentary election in May, and Sharif took over as prime minister early this month, pledging—among other things—to improve relations with India and address his country's crippling energy shortage. ¶ On June 11, the prime minister’s younger brother, Shahbaz Sharif, the head of government in Pakistan's largest province, Punjab, reportedly met officials from India's Ministry of Power and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. They talked about Pakistan importing electricity and natural gas from India. ¶ The meeting in itself is not unprecedented. During its five years in power, the previous government in Islamabad under the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) talked to Indian government officials and companies about importing gasoline, diesel, natural gas and electricity. India seemed willing to help Pakistan then, but nothing happened.¶ There are still factions on both sides of the border that oppose normalizing relations and will try to block efforts by Nawaz Sharif and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to work together on energy and other issues. But as the energy crisis in Pakistan grows increasingly acute, the pressure might overwhelm such opposition. ¶ Among the proposals on the table is a cross-border electricity transmission line with the capacity to transfer 500-1,000 megawatts of power from India to Pakistan. India is short of power and suffers regular planned and unplanned power cuts. But Pakistan is much worse off. ¶ In the fiscal year that ended March 31, the two-thirds of Indians with access to electricity faced an 8.7 percent supply-demand gap. The two-thirds or so of Pakistanis with access to electricity, meanwhile, faced a shortfall of about 30 percent and power cuts 10-13 hours a day, Pakistan’s Supreme Court was reportedly told earlier this month. ¶ Pakistan's power cuts have sparked sometimes-violent protests and slowed the country's economic growth. ¶ If implemented, the proposed transmission line would serve as a sign of goodwill and perhaps earn a small profit for Indian generators. But if 500-1,000 MW of power would help ease Pakistan's power shortage, it wouldn't solve the country’s energy problems. After all, Pakistan has about 22,000 MW of generating capacity, compared to 212,000 MW for India. ¶ Nonetheless, turning to India for power is part of a larger Pakistani strategy to buy more electricity from its neighbors. It imported about 70 MW from Iran last year, is building another 100-MW link and has plans for a 1,000-MW link. There is talk of bringing in 1,000 MW from Tajikistan via Afghanistan, too. ¶ Aside from power, there is also a proposal for an India-to-Pakistan natural gas pipeline. This would allow Pakistan to import either Indian natural gas or liquefied natural gas (LNG) from a third country delivered to one of India's LNG terminals and sent through its pipeline network to Pakistan. Despite years of effort, Pakistan has failed to build its own LNG terminal. ¶ But a natural gas pipeline is the least likely to materialize of the proposed energy cooperation efforts. India only meets about half of its natural gas needs from its own production and its limited LNG import capacity. And a drop in production from Reliance Industries’ massive KG-D6 field off India's east coast means India’s ability to satisfy its own LNG needs has been getting worse, not better. ¶ Still, a delegation from Indian state-controlled gas distribution company GAIL has reportedly offered to deliver to Pakistan 400 million cubic feet of gas per day. To put that in perspective, Pakistan—which uses gas for power generation, cooking, heating and fueling vehicles, among other things—is now surviving on domestic production of about 4 billion cubic feet per day. ¶ Potential profits and international politics may overshadow the fact that Indian consumers need this natural gas, too. Private and state-owned Indian companies may be willing to short their Indian customers if they can get a better offer from across the border. And officials in New Delhi may be willing to let them do so in the name of India-Pakistan confidence-building measures. ¶ Less controversial than the power and natural gas proposals is a plan for India to build a pipeline across the border to sell gasoline or diesel to Pakistan. Although India doesn't produce much crude oil, it is a refining hub: It imports more crude than it needs and turns the excess into gasoline, diesel and other products that it exports. Indian refiners would welcome a new market. ¶ This cross-border energy trade is seen by some as a test-run for India-Pakistan cooperation on the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) and Iran-Pakistan-India (IPI) natural gas pipeline projects. The odds at the moment are stacked against both projects. Instability in Afghanistan makes TAPI tough, while U.S. sanctions on Iran make Indian involvement in IPI doubtful. But these factors could change in the future. ¶ More immediately, India's willingness to help ease Pakistan's energy shortage might encourage Sharif's PML-N government to follow through on its predecessor's promise to grant India most favored nation trading status. This is something Indian companies want and many Pakistani businesses don't: They fear they will be overwhelmed by competition from their massive neighbor. ¶ Nevertheless, if India and Pakistan can work together on energy and increase trade, both countries would benefit. Pakistan would get energy to fuel its lagging economy, and India would get a new market for energy and other exports. As a side benefit, integrating their economies a bit more might help to normalize relations and make future conflicts less likely.
A meeting between Indian and Pakistani leaders on the sidelines of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Summit in Russia on Friday produced a thaw in tense relations between the South Asian rivals. A joint statement outlining measures to restore ties was issued after Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Pakistani counterpart, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, held one-on-one talks. Foreign Secretary Pakistan Aizaz Chaudhry said that the meeting was held in a cordial atmosphere and the two leaders exchanged views on bilateral and regional interest. He added that the two leaders agreed that both countries have a collective responsibility to ensure peace and promote development. The Indian premier accepted Nawaz's invitation to Pakistan for the South Asian Association of Regional Cooperation summit in 2016. Other measures include upcoming counterterror strategy talks in New Delhi between Indian and Pakistani national security advisers, along with direct bilateral talks between border security officials. The breakthrough occurred nearly a year after peace negotiations between the estranged neighbors stalled last August, when New Delhi called off high-level talks. “They agreed that India and Pakistan have a collective responsibility to ensure peace and promote development," Pakistan's Foreign Secretary Chaudhry said, signaling that the two countries are ready to pick up the threads again. "To do so they are prepared to discuss all outstanding issues. Both leaders condemned terrorism in all its forms and agreed to cooperate with each other to eliminate this menace from South Asia.”
US interests in South Asia will benefit when there are closer economic and political ties between the countries of the region. The best way for that to happen is to leave it to the countries of the region. Even though South Asia is the least economically integrated region of the world things have changed in the last few years with almost all countries understanding the benefit of closer connectivity and trade. Every Indian prime minister starting with Jawaharlal Nehru believed ties with neighbours were of paramount importance but their focus was primarily security. It is only in recent years that Indian leaders have understood the need to economically integrate the region. India may be building her military potential but her primary goal is economic growth and development for the foreseeable future. India and Pakistan are nuclear-armed countries adversaries. The civilian leaders in both countries have understood that closer ties will benefit both countries. Indian leaders hope that sooner or later the law of economics will convince Pakistani leaders to follow their Afghan, Sri Lankan, Bangladeshi, Nepali, Burmese and Nepalese counterparts in working towards economic integration. However, for that the Pakistani military intelligence establishment would have to give up on its quest for economic and military parity with India and its policy of using jihadis to achieve foreign and security policy goals.
On February 9, China’s assistant foreign minister, Liu Jianchao, joined his Afghan and Pakistani counterparts in Kabul for the first round of a new trilateral strategic dialogue. The dialogue, attended by Liu, Pakistani Foreign Secretary Aizaz Ahmad Chaudhry, and Afghan Deputy Foreign Minister Hekmat Khalil Karzai provided a tantalizing glimpse of what trilateral cooperation between these neighbors could mean for Afghan stability. As Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Hua Chunying noted in her press conference today, Afghanistan’s security situation was “a major topic” at the trilateral dialogue. All three countries “reaffirmed their commitment to [the] peace and stability of Afghanistan and the region” and China and Pakistan emphasized their support for a peace process “led and owned by the Afghans.” Though the emphasis was on security, most of the deliverables from the meeting were actually in the economic realm, where China is most comfortable. China committed to helping build a hydro-electric dam on the Kunar River and to constructing new road and railroad connections between Afghanistan and Pakistan. The Kunar dam, to be constructed within Afghanistan but close to the Pakistan border, is expected to provide electricity for both countries. Indeed, the whole theme of the meeting seems to have been greater Afghan-Pakistani cooperation, facilitated by China. Afghanistan’s representatives at the talks specifically asked China to “play a constructive role in promoting bilateral interactions between Afghanistan and Pakistan,” according to Hua. China has a close relationship with Pakistan, often described as an “all-weather friendship.” Kabul hopes that China can use its unique ties with Islamabad to pressure Pakistan into playing a constructive role in Afghan security. Afghanistan in particular wants Pakistan to nudge the Afghan Taliban into negotiations over a true unity government – rather than supporting the group’s more militant ambitions. Beijing itself hosted representatives from the Taliban last year, in what was widely read as an indication China is willing to play the role of mediator in negotiations. But Afghan officials believe that Pakistan will have to be at the table as well and they hope China can help convince its ally to join the negotiations in good faith. Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi will be in Islamabad later this week; Kabul will be watching closely. U.S. officials interviewed by the Wall Street Journal believe that China is ready to become more politically involved in promoting Afghan security – both through mediation and through   more concrete measures such as stepping up the training of Afghan troops. However, the recent trilateral dialogue mostly limited itself to economic commitments. Promoting economic projects that will link Afghanistan and Pakistan has undeniable political ramifications, but still relies on the tools (investment and aid) China has grown accustomed to using around the world. Outside of economic deals, China, Pakistan, and Afghanistan committed to broadening their cooperation on counter-terrorism, but there are no specifics on how the countries will do so. All three countries have suffered from deadly terrorist attacks in the past year and remain concerned about the growing influence of jihadist militants groups (including not only the Talban but Islamic State, which has been ramping up its activities in the region as well).
Overcoming the Challenges: Can It Work? Despite the challenges impeding stabilization programs in Afghanistan, some activities have met expectations and achieved their intended stabilization results through their fundamental application of coordinated planning, cooperative relationships, unified programming, and appropriate timelines. An example of one such effort was USAID’s participation in the Village Stability Operations (VSO) conducted by elements of the Combined Forces Special Operations Component Command– Afghanistan and Combined Joint Special Operations Task Force–Afghanistan. The Stabilization Unit encouraged and supported engagement with special operations forces (SOF), and the resulting support given to the VSO program throughout Afghanistan is a commendable confirmation that collaborative stabilization operations can work effectively. The following example illustrates how civil military teams can implement COIN efforts successfully if they follow COIN doctrine, plan early, understand each other, and work together. The Kunduz/Baghlan (K/B) corridor is located in the northern Afghan province of Kunduz. Before 2009, security was relatively permissive in Kunduz and Baghlan provinces, although skirmishes were common between and among warlords, tribes, and communities. By 2009, a downturn in security resulted in the region becoming more kinetic and problematic. One driver of instability central to this rise in insurgent violence is partially attributable to the designation and recognition of the K/B corridor as a critical and alternative North Atlantic Treaty Organization supply line. Beginning in late 2010, USAID, ISAF (including SOF Operational Detachment– Alpha [ODA]) teams, and the government of Afghanistan designed and implemented a stabilization strategy to support COIN efforts in this corridor. Based on the COIN continuum phases of “clear, hold, and build,” and through an established assessment process, USAID identified a set of interventions that supported the Afghan government and aimed at systematically addressing the underlying causes of instability and grievances of villagers living within the corridor. By January 2011, USAID—with support from Afghan Community Development Councils (CDCs) and District Development Assemblies (DDAs), USAID implementing partners, and ISAF—outlined the key areas for stabilization interventions for startup once clearing operations terminated, resulting in the formation of a “stabilization corridor” designated within the K/B corridor. In February 2011, USAID sponsored a joint workshop with the Afghan CDC and DDA cluster chiefs in Kunduz City. The workshop represented a milestone in communication and coordination, as it was the first time in several years that the district and village representatives had a chance to work together due to increased security.
USAID uses a standard approach to implementing stabilization activities. As security improves, field personnel move from more permissive to less permissive communities, thereby creating a safety zone where implementing partners can work with the Afghan government and the CDCs in relative safety. This bottom-up approach interlocked closely with the VSO methodology to support and promote socioeconomic development and good governance. By working with the ODA teams and within the ODA VSPs, USAID could more effectively provide grants, achieve higher efficiency, and maximize program impacts. In addition to determining the perimeter of the clearing operation areas in both provinces, USAID worked closely with the Village Stability Coordination Centers (VSCC) in Kunduz and Baghlan, and together with the ODA teams determined the area of influence of each VSP. All VSPs in Kunduz and Baghlan were located and mapped within the stabilization corridor, and by April 2011, USAID Kunduz, VSCC Kunduz, and Special Forces ODA developed a strategic and operational plan for USAID activities in VSPs. To operationalize the new strategy, USAID funded two community-based stabilization projects: the Community Based Stabilization Grant (CBSG) program and Community Development Program mentioned earlier. CBSG was a 2-year project implemented through three Afghan nongovernmental organizations that worked with the CDCs, DDAs, and other organizations. Conversely, CDP employed a direct implementation model whereby implementers worked with community citizens rather than through the CDCs and DDAs. Through VSO, USAID also determined the parameters of cooperation between USAID implementing partners and the ODA teams, and jointly developed an implementation plan for the VSPs in Kunduz municipality and Baghlan Province. The VSPs in both provinces were located within the stabilization corridor. Through January 2012, USAID implemented 47 projects with the ODA teams—20 in Kunduz and 27 in Baghlan. The program in northern Afghanistan will now begin its own transition to something new. USAID will implement the SIKA project and build on progress made in the same areas that were important under CBSG and CDP and, it is hoped, bridge the gap from stabilization to development. The difference will be that the Afghan government, through a regional ministry presence, will take a more active role in identifying community grievances and addressing sources of instability and, in turn, fulfilling the promise of stabilization through good governance. The civil-military relationship will also change. Prior to 2010, civil-military coordination in the North was minimal and USAID reacted to the shaping and holding events of the COIN continuum rather than participating in the process. Today, USAID officers in the North can integrate fully into the VSCC structures in both provinces and are currently visiting the existing, transitioning, and new VSPs.
Throughout the United States’ 13-year war in Afghanistan, the Central Asian nation of Kazakhstan has been a reliable partner, offering assistance ranging from transit routes for U.S. troops, to airspace for non-lethal U.S. supply missions and money to help educate a generation of Afghan children whose lives offer a new promise for their war-torn country. The Kazakh Parliament fiercely debated sending troops into Afghanistan in 2012 to assist the U.S. mission, but the nation’s leaders ultimately opted against it, reasoning that Kazakhstan’s status as a neutral actor in the region was too important to sacrifice. But as the U.S. government dramatically reduces its military footprint in Afghanistan, Kazakhstan is stepping up to help ensure stability in the critical Central Asian region. Five years ago, U.S. troop levels in Afghanistan had peaked at about 140,000. Today, U.S. President Barack Obama’s administration has slashed that number to about 10,600. About 5,000 of those troops were scheduled to leave by the end of this year, with the rest expected to return home in 2016. But in February, the Pentagon announced that it may keep U.S. troop levels stable in Afghanistan at about 10,000 to help reinforce Afghan President Ashraf Ghani’s promising new security strategy. About 2,000 U.S. troops are still conducting counterterrorism missions in Afghanistan, and Pentagon leaders have argued for a continued aggressive stance against Al-Qaida and Islamic State militants. Galymzhan Kirbassov, a lecturer at Columbia University and a member of the Journalists and Writers Foundation at the United Nations, said security concerns in Central Asia following the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan are quite real. “The withdrawal from Afghanistan will definitely affect security conditions in Kazakhstan and Central Asian countries,” Kirbassov said. “Some terrorist groups that operated in Afghanistan have relocated to Pakistan after the U.S. invasion, but now they are highly likely to move back again.” Kirbassov also noted that opium production – a key element of terrorism financing in the Central Asia – has reached record high levels recently in Afghanistan. “Radical groups will finance their activities through smuggling drugs through northern neighbors,” he said. “Previously established networks of drug smuggling are still operational and will be used extensively.” But Kirbassov also said that among Central Asian nations, Kazakhstan, in particular, has been vigilant in protecting against drug trafficking and religious extremism. For example, Kazakhstan has established the Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination Center for Combating Illicit Trafficking of Narcotic Drugs, Psychotropic Substances and their Precursors in Almaty. The organization allows the countries of the region to cooperate in their fight against drug trafficking. “Kazakhstan has passed several laws on fight against terrorism,” he said. “These new regulations are at the national level and enhance cooperation among security agencies. Some programs are established for de-radicalization, and imams and other community leaders warn local population about extremism and where it will lead. But nobody yet knows about the effectiveness of such programs.” Kazakhstan’s ambassador to the United States, Kairat Umarov, said the ongoing recalculation – and perhaps further withdrawal – of U.S. troops from Afghanistan has limited implications for Kazakhstan. “Kazakhstan’s security is not much affected by the U.S. transition from Afghanistan, as it is taking place gradually and in a responsible way,” Umarov said. “The United States is expected to continue the economic and financial assistance to the government of Afghanistan and help increase capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces. At the same time, Central Asia’s security will depend on what is happening in Afghanistan.” Kazakhstan plans to continue its efforts to bolster Afghan society and institutional structures as the U.S. reduces its military presence in Afghanistan. “Kazakhstan is working to contribute to overall development,” Umarov said. “For instance, Kazakhstan provides food and humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. Also, we finance infrastructure projects such as repairing the Kunduz-Talukan highway, building a school in Samangan, and a hospital in Bamian. And we are committed to supporting Afghan National Security Forces.” “We believe this is a tangible contribution of our government to Afghan stabilization efforts in the international community,” he said. Before his meeting with Kazakh Foreign Minister Erlan Idrissov at the State Department in Washington late last year, U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry said Kazakhstan’s partnership was crucially important. “I think it’s fair to say that in the region the relationship between the United States and Kazakhstan is really one of the most consequential for us, and we’re very grateful for the leadership that Kazakhstan has been showing,” Kerry said, singling out Kazakhstan’s education initiatives in Afghanistan – and the $50 million that Kazakhstan’s government had committed to the effort.” “There are Afghans who are now in significant numbers studying in Kazakhstan, and this will be a critical component of capacity building for Afghanistan and of stability,” Kerry said. “So we’re very grateful for that kind of major effort.” Today, Kazakhstan is implementing a $50 million scholarship program for 1,000 Afghan students to study medical sciences, business management, engineering, agriculture and other specialties at the best Kazakh universities. Umarov said the investment is a bet on Afghanistan’s – and the region’s – future. “We believe that education and capacity building will boost development and thus contribute to improving security situation in Afghanistan,” Umarov said. “It is with this belief in mind that we are establishing an agency for international development, KazAID, which will be focused on the providing technical assistance to Afghanistan and other Central Asian countries at the initial stage of its development.” Kazakhstan coordinates with NATO on security issues in Central Asia In addition to direct consultation and planning with U.S. military and diplomatic leaders, Kazakhstan also coordinates with NATO on institutional, democratic and defense reforms in the Central Asian region. An Individual Partnership Action Plan – commonly referred to as an IPAP – outlines the overall cooperation agreement between Kazakhstan and NATO. In 2010, Kazakhstan, along with Russia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan and Belarus completed an agreement with NATO allowing the transportation of non-lethal cargo to Afghanistan by rail. Then, in 2012, NATO crafted an agreement with Kazakhstan, as well as with several other Central Asian countries and Russia, for the redeployment of non-lethal International Security Assistance Force from Afghanistan. Kazakhstan also pitches in on the fight against terrorism by sharing information and analysis with NATO, enhancing national counter-terrorist capabilities and improving its own border security. The country has also allowed for continued air and land transit for NATO and U.S. troops and equipment supplies to and from Afghanistan. Zhakip Assanov, Kazakhstan’s deputy prosecutor general, told the Kazakh Senate late last year that Kazakh intelligence prevented nine terrorist attacks in 2013 and 2014 and Kazakh courts sentenced two terror cell instigators to five year prison terms. He also said thousands of online extremist materials, including websites, were dismantled by Kazakh authorities and that since 2011, Kazakhstan has seen more than 10 recorded terrorist attacks, which resulted in 21 deaths, including 17 law enforcement officers and special service agents. The incidents occurred in Almaty, Taraz and Aktobe and are believed by Kazakh authorities to have been encouraged by outside forces. Since 2012, there have been to further terrorist attacks. “It is no secret that these organizations are spreading their negative policies in Kazakhstan,” Assanov told the Senate. Richard Weitz, director of the Center for Political-Military Analysis and a Senior Fellow at the Hudson Institute, said as the U.S. reduces its presence in the Afghanistan, the U.S.-Kazakhstan relationship will become more important than ever in countering terrorism. “The U.S. is continuing to work with Kazakhstan and other countries to support regional security,” Weitz said, adding that Kazakhstan is gratified that the “U.S. will continue to oppose regional terrorism and extremism.” “Kazakhstan is continuing to support the U.S. mission and is providing economic and other aid to Afghanistan,” Weitz said. Meanwhile, the Collective Security Treaty Organization consisting of Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, and Tajikistan, and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, consisting of China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan are both trying to coordinate the response of its member states to regional terrorism. Umarov, the Kazakh ambassador in Washington, said while Kazakhstan preferred to stay neutral as combat raged in Afghanistan it was simultaneously bolstering its own defense. “Kazakhstan is in the process of modernizing its armed forces so that they are ready to face the contemporary security challenges,” Umarov said. “Kazakhstan regularly holds Steppe Eagle international military exercises and organizes international exhibitions of weapons systems, which helps to build new partnerships. As a member of the Collective Security Treaty Organization and participant of the NATO Partnership for Peace program, Kazakhstan has broad scope of international partners in the area of hard security. Kazakhstan’s security is provided, first of all, by the excellent, professional, well trained and well equipped, patriotic men and women in uniform, representing all ethnic and religious communities of my country.”
Murders in Mexico fell for a third straight year in 2014 — the most pronounced declines occurring along the U.S. border — a sign the country is slowly stabilizing after gruesome drug wars. There were 15,649 people murdered in Mexico in 2014, a 13.8% reduction from the previous year and down from a peak of 22,480 in 2011, according to a report set to be released Thursday by the University of San Diego's Justice in Mexico Project. The reductions were steeper along the U.S.-Mexican border. Five of the six Mexican states that border the USA reported a combined drop of 17.7% in the number of homicides. "These data really help to underscore that we're talking about a sea change in violence," said David Shirk, co-author of the report and director of the Justice in Mexico Project, a U.S.-based initiative to protect human rights south of the border. "You still have elevated levels of crime, so we still have a long way to go. But there is improvement, and we have to acknowledge that improvement and understand why it's happening so we can try to further it." The reduction in homicides does not mean Mexico has completely solved its security problems. Maureen Meyer, senior associate for Mexico at the Washington Office on Latin America, said Mexicans still face extremely high levels of kidnappings, extortion and other violent crimes. American travelers have also been attacked. The U.S. State Department issued a warning April 13 that said U.S. citizens continue to be victims of carjackings, robberies and other violent crimes. Meyer said the overall reduction in murders is an encouraging trend that allows Mexican officials time to cement improvements in the judicial system, anti-corruption programs and police practices. She said the government must "make sure that the space opened by having less violence leads to structural changes to Mexico's institutions to guarantee a strong rule of law in the future." Mexico became home to a bloody, nationwide drug war after then-President Felipe Calderón announced in December 2006 that the government would crack down on drug cartels and go after its leaders. The United States agreed to help, and Congress has sent $2.3 billion to Mexico since 2008 to train police and buy new aircraft, scanners, X-Ray machines and nearly 400 canines that can detect drugs, weapons and explosives. The strategy seemed to work. Calderón's administration boasted several high-profile successes, capturing or killing the heads of different cartels. But the unexpected consequence was an explosion of violence throughout the country as lower-level cartel members fought to fill the power vacuum. At least 138,000 people have been murdered in Mexico since the end of 2006, according to the report. When President Enrique Peña Nieto took office in December 2012, he continued going after cartel leaders, most notably capturing Joaquín "El Chapo" Guzmán, the biggest drug supplier to the USA, last year. Shirk said the violence that usually follows such high-profile arrests has not materialized in recent years. Meyer said some cartels appear to have negotiated deals to split up the lucrative smuggling routes into the USA.
When Mexican President Felipe Calderón left office in 2012, the nation’s war on the drug cartels had already claimed 60,000 lives. Now, two years into the presidency of his successor, Enrique Peña Nieto, security conditions are still far from praiseworthy, but have improved in several key areas. Homicides, the most reliable indicator for measuring public security in Mexico, have steadily decreased over the past two years. According to Mexico’s Insituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía (National Institute of Statistics and Geography—INEGI) the number of murders decreased 13 percent between 2012 and 2013, and the homicide rate per 100,000 people declined from 22 to 19. Organized crime-related deaths have decreased even faster. According to the database of Lantia Consultores, a Mexico City-based public policy consulting firm, there were 1,956 organized crime-related deaths in the second quarter of 2014, down from a peak of 4,587 in the second quarter of 2011. The pace of the decline in organized crime-related deaths has been especially encouraging in two key metropolitan areas. In Ciudad Juárez, once known as the world’s most violent city, organized crime-related deaths have dropped from a peak of 787 during the third quarter of 2010 to 54 in the second quarter of 2014—a 93 percent drop. Likewise, in the Monterrey metropolitan area, Mexico’s industrial capital, murders in this category dropped from 472 in the first quarter of 2012 to 38 in the second quarter of 2014. The improvement in Monterrey seems to be the result of a thorough revamping of state and local police departments, which is largely the result of aggressive lobbying by the city’s powerful business community. This demonstrates the potential of local institution-building efforts in Mexico. Even the U.S. Department of State acknowledged as much in its August 2014 Mexico Travel Warning, which stated, “Security services in and around Monterrey are robust and have proven responsive and effective in combating violent crimes.”1 Moreover, over the past two years, peace has returned to cities throughout northern Mexico to an extent that seemed impossible between 2008 and 2012. High-profile attacks, shootings and roadblocks are less frequent. (One exception is Tamaulipas, which experienced a violent crisis as recently as last April.) Unfortunately, data for crimes other than homicide remain unreliable in Mexico. Thus, it is very hard to assess whether the downward trend in murders extends to other violent crimes, especially kidnapping and extortion, which are foremost concerns for Mexicans. The Peña Nieto administration has also recorded a number of important operational successes. The Zetas, a particularly violent cartel founded by defectors from elite military groups, have been nearly disbanded. (The decision to have federal forces target Zetas was taken at the end of the previous administration.) Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán—Mexico’s most notorious drug lord—was captured last February by Peña Nieto’s forces. His capture was skillfully executed and managed to avoid a violent conflict among factions of the Sinaloa Cartel. Some would argue that capturing such kingpins represents only a temporary setback to the cartels. However, such captures convey an important message: the Mexican state is only willing to tolerate so much violence or public notoriety, and it has the strength to prevail over drug lords. Arguably, Peña Nieto’s biggest victory thus far has been the successful operations in the state of Michoacán in early 2014, which dealt a significant blow to the Knights Templar—a drug cartel that had exercised virtually uncontested influence over political and economic activities in the state for the previous two years. Former Governor Fausto Vallejo and several mayors have acknowledged that the gang extorted protection money from almost all 113 municipal governments. A stream of recently released videos featuring mayors, state-level officials and even Vallejo’s son talking and drinking with the Knights Templar leader, Servando “La Tuta” Gómez, seem to confirm the cartel’s tight grip over local and state authorities. What made the Michoacán case particularly challenging was the emergence of armed self-defense groups in the Tierra Caliente region that organized to combat ever-increasing extortion by the Knights Templar. As the initial uprising rapidly expanded, a widespread civil conflict became a serious threat. The intervention of federal troops should have begun earlier, and was triggered only when self-defense groups were about to march on Apatzingán, the stronghold of the Knights Templar in the Tierra Caliente region, risking massive bloodshed. However, since the arrival of hundreds of federal forces in Michoacán last January, stability and security have improved. Organized crime-related deaths decreased 40 percent between the first and second quarters of 2014, and another large reduction is expected for the third quarter. Several Knights Templar leaders and some of their political associates have been arrested, avoiding an extensive witch hunt. In an effort to restore the rule of law, the federal government created the Comisión para la Seguridad y el Desarrollo Integral en el Estado de Michoacán (Commission for Security and Development in the State of Michoacán), which has displaced the state government as the key decision maker in the region. The Commission has brokered a ceasefire with most self-defense groups, many of which opted to join the ranks of a legal rural police.
It’s funny how quickly things can change for a Mexican president. I remember President Lopez-Portillo on top of the world in 1981 and then hated by everyone after the devaluations a year later. He left office as a disgraced man and spent much of his retirement in seclusion. What about President Salinas? He was doing great and then came that awful 1994 and all of the accusations of corruption. He became a “bad word” and left the country for years. President Pena-Nieto was doing well a year ago after important oil and school reforms. Today, he faces a lot of criticism for corruption and the recent deaths of 43 students. It seems like the deaths of the students have broken the back of the camel, as Mexican journalist Jose Carreno-Figueras just wrote: “To use a cliche, it was the straw that broke the camel’s back, a strong indication that Mexico’s people are no longer willing to tolerate the current state of affairs. Some have suggested that the government will fall, and others have said Mexico is a failed state. The Mexican government does not appear ready to fall, not even close. But it seems to be in a defensive situation, maybe waiting for the tempest to wane so that it can regain the political initiative.” To be fair, it’s not all President Pena-Nieto’s fault. At the same time, he’s the president and gets the credit and the blame. Mexico faces a serious problem and I don’t see any easy answers. There is too much money in the drug business and the authorities seem incapable of controlling the gangs behind the violence. (We remind you that we in the US consume the billions of dollars going to the cartels) Last, but not least, there is a sense that the whole system is “compromised” as Mr Carreno-Figueras wrote. Mexico is not a failed state but it is failing in many areas, specially in projecting to its citizens that the justice works for all.
Omar Trevino Morales, leader of the notorious Zetas drugs cartel in Mexico, has been captured by security forces. He was arrested in the early hours of Wednesday in the city of Monterrey in the northern state of Nuevo Leon, police said. He is believed to have run the Zetas cartel since the capture of his brother, Miguel Angel, in 2013. The arrest comes days after Mexican police captured another suspected drug lord, Servando "La Tuta" Gomez. Servando Gomez was the leader of the Knights Templar cartel in Michoacan state. Omar Trevino Morales, known as Z-42 and believed to be 40 or 41 years old, is wanted in the US and Mexico on charges of drug trafficking, kidnap and murder. The Mexican government had a 30m peso (£1.3m; $2m) reward for his capture while the US offered a $5m (£3.2m) reward. 'Extremely violent profile' Mexican media, citing officials, said he had been seized in the Monterrey suburb of San Pedro Garza Garcia in a joint operation by the army and the federal police. He was arrested in a luxury home without a shot being fired, local media said. null Neighbours told El Universal newspaper the house had been bought about six months ago by a family "which kept themselves to themselves and did not mingle with other neighbours". He has been transferred under heavy security to Mexico City and paraded before television cameras. National Security Commission Director Monte Alejandro Rubido Garcia said intelligence gatherings since the capture of Omar Trevino's brother led to his arrest. "For the past few years, he's been one of the country's most-wanted delinquents, with an extremely violent profile," said Mr Rubido. The capture of not just one - but two - drugs kingpins in less than a week is a coup for the Mexican government. It has come in for criticism in recent months for failing to quell the violence.
When opposing nations gained access to nuclear weapons, it fundamentally changed the logic of war. You might say that it made questions about war more cleanly logical—with nuclear-armed belligerents, there are fewer classic military analyses about morale, materiel, and maneuverings. Hundreds of small-scale tactical decisions dissolve into a few hugely important large-scale strategic ones, like, What happens if one side drops a nuclear bomb on its nuclear-armed opponent?
Next year will be the seventieth anniversary of the end of the last global conflict. There have been points on that timeline — such as the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, and a Soviet computer malfunction in 1983 that erroneously suggested that the U.S. had attacked, and perhaps even the Kosovo War in 1999 — when a global conflict was a real possibility. Yet today — in the shadow of a flare up which some are calling a new Cold War between Russia and the U.S. — I believe the threat of World War III has almost faded into nothingness. That is, the probability of a world war is the lowest it has been in decades, and perhaps the lowest it has ever been since the dawn of modernity.
But what about a non-nuclear global war? Other changes — economic and social in nature — have made that highly unlikely too.
(NaturalNews) During the Cold War, Americans - and citizens of countries all over the globe - worried that the two superpowers at the time, the United States and the Soviet Union, could someday launch a nuclear war that would shroud the world in planet-killing radioactive fallout.
If you were looking for reasons to be nervous, Wednesday provided lots of them, like these: — Chinese stocks plunged again, with the Shanghai Composite Index falling another 5.9 percent. — The Greek debt crisis remained unresolved, with European officials still scrambling for a solution. — Many raw-material prices continued their slide — with the Bloomberg Commodity Index down 26 percent from last year. And then came a thunderbolt. A "technical issue" forced the shutdown of the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) for most of the day. The world's largest stock exchange stood silent from 11:32 a.m. until 3:10 p.m. ET. NYSE officials said they needed the downtime to untangle a malfunction of some sort. Despite this daunting collection of financial-market problems, optimists could take heart: Investors did not panic. In the end, it was a tough day, but not a disastrous one. By the 4 p.m. closing bell, the NYSE was returning to normal. The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed down about 261 to 17,515, and while that's lousy, it was no stampede. Analysts generally attributed the NYSE's calm close to the market redundancies that allowed traders to do business. Investors were not trapped. They could continue buying and selling shares via NASDAQ or BATS or dozens of other exchanges and private trading venues. So you could recap events this way: Wednesday ended up being a good day because, even with disruptions and fears, free markets functioned around the world. Yes, Chinese stocks were dropping, but the recent plunge is no surprise after a super-fast run up over the past year. And even though the Greek situation is awful, it is not generating panic outside of Greece. In fact, the rest of the eurozone is seeing many economic indicators turning up. And even without the NYSE functioning, investors had the freedom to continue going about their business. So maybe we are actually seeing a world that is becoming more stable, thanks to trading-platform redundancies. And after learning from the financial crisis of 2008-09, central bankers and regulators everywhere are better equipped to roll with the disruptions related to Greek debt and Chinese stocks. Bottom line: good for us. While there are serious trouble spots and plenty of pain for some individuals, the overall global financial markets are more stable and mature. Or you could recap the day this way: yikes! Just because we haven't seen panic yet, the planet is piling up lots of oily rags and kindling. Sooner or later, a spark could be struck somewhere, starting a global bonfire and melting down asset prices. No matter what happens, some day, economic historians will be able to look back and see clearly where we were heading. For now, let's just say these are interesting times.
One of China's top government officials, Premier Li Keqiang, is reassuring markets that his country will avoid a much-feared "hard landing" as economic growth slows.¶ Worries have swirled for years that China could take a dive after decades of booming economic growth.¶ Indeed, China's economy expanded at its slowest pace in more than two decades in 2014 -- 7.4% instead of the government's target of 7.5% -- but Premier Li characterized the growth as "medium to high speed."¶ "China's economy has entered a state of 'new normal'," the premier told a packed audience at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.¶ The premier compared China to a fast-moving train, saying it still had speed and momentum, but was becoming more steady as the country introduces economic reforms.¶ Those reforms are intended to boost entrepreneurship, encourage healthy competition and protect intellectual property, among other things.¶ Premier Li reassured the audience that his country was happy to have slower growth, so long as it was solid and stable.¶ "Regional or systemic financial crises will not happen in China," he said.¶ China continues to face a number of long-standing risks, such as ballooning government and corporate debt and a weak property sector.¶ In the face of a sustained downturn, the government has deployed incremental measures to boost the economy. Beijing has accelerated infrastructure projects, cut interest rates and tried to bolster the flagging property market.¶ China averaged economic expansion of around 10% a year over the past three decades, pushing it up the list of biggest economies and boosting household wealth.
¶ This spring and early summer were full of reports that China’s economy — and the dangerous political clout that comes with it — were ebbing. Some were even predicting that the Dragon Economy would collapse altogether and that it would take the world with it in its spiral toward oblivion. But despite these predictions of an economic doomsday, things are looking up this month. Manufacturing surged in July, indeed, rising faster than it has in the past two years. The purchasing managers index (PMI) hit 51.7 last month — the best since April 2012. Any number above 50 indicates growth, but the larger picture shows more than growth; it shows momentum. The main reason for this bump comes in the form of government policy, from boosting spending on railways and social housing to tax breaks for small enterprises.¶ ¶ Yes, China’s “Protect the Eight” is now “Protect the 7.5″, but it’s to be expected. Small things like China’s first bond default back in March caused a bit of mild suspicion and panic; in reality, China was just letting the market do what it does (onlookers can be forgiven for not recognizing this rare sight). Companies are learning their lessons and running from the Chinese “Debt Trap” in unusual ways, and the race to create a consumer culture is taking hold. Gordon G. Chang’s infamous and now proven incorrect book The Coming Collapse of China — a favorite whipping boy for pro-China nationalists — included very real worries, positing that China’s sluggish state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and bogus loans would wreak havoc in five to ten years. That was in 2001 — 13 years later “the coming collapse” still hasn’t arrived. In short, whether people are baffled by China’s numbers, angry over the effect China is having on their countries, or just fed up with the Communist Party’s grandstanding and human rights violations, their concerns haven’t translated to economic failure.¶ ¶ Of course, the lynchpin of the supposed collapse is the Chinese housing market. Fear of shadow banking, unregulated and sometimes unreasonable construction, and the outright cost of all this development (all legitimate worries) has had many wondering when the Chinese housing market is going to collapse and take world markets with it. However, China’s housing market simply defies prediction and common sense. Supposed bubble burst after bubble burst, the market remains reliable, and this is due in no small part to the tightening and loosening of government policy. Chang has been at the head of the housing doomsday brigade, and there’s nothing really wrong with that; pointing to systemic flaws is important. But catastrophic collapse does seem increasingly unlikely.¶ ¶ On housing, the government knows it’s in a bit of a pickle — they have to keep building because it makes up such a large portion of the GDP but building could cause the bubble to finally burst big time. It’s true, China has built too much, but the likely reality is that prices for properties and construction will drop, which will keep China away from the constant predictions of a doomsday scenario. And it did look like doomsday to some. But today, the doomsday predictions for China seem more and more like wishful thinking. While the numbers may point in the direction of worst case scenario, China’s authoritarian government is always quick to act.¶ ¶ Back in May, when people were worried the bubble had already burst, Matt O’Brien commented in The Washington Post: “Hopefully, the rest of the world won’t catch a cold when China sneezes — and it will only be a sneeze.” Yes, a real housing market crash would be potentially catastrophic for China and the rest of the world, but that’s assuming the authorities will twiddle their thumbs as the economy collapses and that systemic failure is more probable than sustainable, predetermined solutions.
Inspect China’s appalling trade data closely, and a crumbling of economic growth is tough to find.¶ Exports unexpectedly plunged 15% in March compared with a year earlier and imports were down 13%. Betting on a hard landing in China increased on the news, with the Australian dollar, a proxy for China’s growth, falling sharply.¶ Yet this month’s trade data is probably not a sign of the apocalypse. China’s monthly trade figures are notoriously volatile, exacerbated by the rush of orders surrounding the Lunar New Year holiday, which changes dates every year. And on the import side, giant state-owned buyers of raw materials dip in and out of markets.¶ Looking more broadly, the news isn’t so dreary. Take the first three months of the year together, and exports actually grew 5% on-year. That may sound slow, but in the first quarter last year exports shrank 3%, and that quarter the economy still eked out a 7.4% year-over-year growth rate.¶ Some of last year’s decline in exports was due to a crackdown on money smuggling through inflated trade invoices, but that just underscores how unreliable the figures are.¶ ENLARGE¶ Weakness of imports is often pointed to as a sign of slowing domestic demand, as construction projects that require raw materials tail off. That is definitely a factor with real estate hurting. But the collapse in commodities prices means that the headline trade figures overstate the situation.¶ All things being equal, most of the drop in imports in the first quarter can be attributed to lower prices for just two line items: oil and iron ore. By value, China’s first-quarter imports of these two were down $63 billion from a year earlier. But in volume terms, China imported more of both—albeit at a slower growth rate than in the go-go past.¶ Alternative indicators, meanwhile, hardly show a collapse in trade. Container throughput at China’s ports rose 7.4% in first quarter compared with a year earlier, according to Citigroup.¶ China’s economy is undoubtedly slowing. And first quarter GDP data reported later this week will confirm that. The debate among China investors, however, is over whether there’s a controlled glide or an imminent collapse. The trade figures, for now, point to the less dramatic outcome.
Growth is picking up in Japan. No, really.¶ The GDP numbers out yesterday showed the world’s third-largest economy emerging from a brief recession—if you use the conventional definition of two straight quarters of contracting GDP.¶ True, that was a bit less than the 3.7% analysts had forecasted. But it’s a welcome development, especially given that export growth was a key driver of the quarter. The weak yen engineered by the Bank of Japan seems to be giving a fillip to Japan’s important exporting sector.¶ And the export boomlet seems set to continue. January trade data released today showed exports surging 17%, and imports collapsing by 9%, thanks to falling global energy prices.¶ Optimism seems to be spreading, with the Nikkei 225 hitting a 15-year high Thursday.¶ The key question for the future of Japanese growth is how consumer demand responds. Consumption accounts for roughly 60% of the Japanese economy, and the key ingredient for consumption is wage growth. For the moment, Japanese consumers—like consumers worldwide—are getting a real wage raise thanks to declining energy prices. But to create sustainable consumer growth, corporations have to be convinced to give workers a larger cut of profits.¶ It just might be possible. The largest employer in the US, Wal-Mart, signaled today that it was going to begin raising wages for its workforce, in a nod to both rising political pressure and tightening labor markets. Similar dynamics are in place in Japan. Prime minister Shinzo Abe has stepped up calls for wage increases. And labor conditions—best measured in a rapidly aging Japan via the job openings-to-applicants ratio—are at their tightest in more than two decades.
While global oil prices have collapsed, Russia most certainly will not. In fact, it may even emerge stronger from the current supply glut.¶ That was one of the major points that emerged from a panel discussion hosted by the Center for the National Interest on February 24, 2015. The discussion, entitled Russia’s Energy Sector and the Oil Price Collapse, featured three energy experts including Dr. Tatiana Mitrova, the head of the Oil and Gas Department at the Energy Research Institute at the Russian Academy of Sciences.¶ Mitrova did not seem particularly worried about the impact of sanctions or falling oil prices on the Russian economy, noting that major Russian energy companies such as Gazprom and Rosneft have large reserves and government support.¶ Exports are another factor that will mitigate the pain Gazprom and Russian oil exporters feel from the drop in prices. Indeed, Mitrova pointed out that the sharp devaluation of the ruble relative to the dollar in recent months will make exports increasingly lucrative to Russian energy exporters. That’s because revenues from energy exports are denominated in U.S. dollars while many of their costs—such as labor—will still be in rubles.¶ Furthermore, companies like Rosneft are not hugely affected by lower prices because of the way Russia taxes the oil industry. Specifically, as others have pointed out, in Russia “the per-barrel tax rate decreases as oil prices fall, shifting most of the upside/downside due to changes in the oil price from the oil producers to the state.” Consequently, according to Mitrova, it does not matter greatly to oil companies if prices are $50 or $100 a barrel.¶ Russia’s gas industry is a different story, however. According to Mitrova, Russia is experiencing a “huge gas glut” with a current excess of about “110-140 billion cubic meters of gas.” Because there is not enough domestic demand for all this gas— and only Gazprom is currently allowed to export gas— the situation is becoming “tough” for Russian gas companies, especially smaller enterprises. In fact, Mitrova said there is already a “price war” amongst Russian gas companies for the domestic market.¶ While not challenging most of her assessment of the current state of the Russian energy market, the other two panelists—Frank Verrastro, Senior Vice President for Energy and Geopolitics at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), and Charles Ebinger, a Senior Fellow in the Energy and Climate Initiative at the Brookings Institution—did depart from Mitrova when it came to how quickly global energy markets will recover.¶ According to Mitrova, there is a “major expectation” among Russian analysts and politicians that the price of oil will recover soon “because no one is happy with lower prices.” In fact, she suggested that the general feeling in Russia is that prices will be back up in the $80 per-barrel range by the end of this year.¶ Ebinger and Verrastro both disagreed, arguing that low prices are here to stay for a while. Ebinger, in particular, argued that it is “very hard to see the upside for petroleum demand that would drive prices back up.”¶ To illustrate this point, Ebinger pointed to the numerous fundamental changes taking place in consumer markets, including greater energy efficiency, demand topping out in much of the developed world and a reduction in subsidies among some of the larger emerging markets like India and Indonesia. Even in China—which, along with India, is expected to anchor demand growth in the coming decades—automobile demand is slowing.¶ As a result, Ebinger expects that the oil market “will test the upper thirties” before all is said and done, and that “it will be a long, long time before we see eighty plus dollars in the market.”¶ Verrastro agreed with Ebinger’s outlook on the oil market. “We could be in this [depressed market] a good, long time,” Verrastro said. “Certainly for 2015... and some people think into 2016.” Ebinger and Verrastro did disagree on why oil markets will eventually recover. Whereas Ebinger felt that renewed global economic growth would be the “catalyst” that revived oil markets, Verrastro argued that eventually supply will catch up to reduced demand, driving prices back up.
Over the past week, the whole world has been fixed on the state of the Russian ruble. Last Tuesday, the ruble declined dramatically, even though the Central Bank of Russia had increased its key interest rate to 17 percent. This has revived memories of Russia's 1998 economic crisis. Then how should we perceive the weakening ruble and its potential impact?¶ The decline of ruble this time is the result of the accumulated slowdown of the Russian economy in the past few years. Since the 2008 global financial crisis, the Russian economy has experienced an obvious trend of decline. Although the economy revived occasionally, it stayed lukewarm. In 2013, the growth rate was only 1.5 percent.¶ Meanwhile, since the Ukrainian crisis, Russia's hardline foreign policy has escalated economic sanctions imposed by Western countries, adding more difficulties to the already gloomy situation. The recent plummeting oil prices also dealt a heavy blow to the situation, shaking the market's confidence toward the ruble. These are the most direct and important cause for the ruble's steep fall. This shows the recent ruble crisis, which is the outcome of both internal and external factors, is unlike the 1998 economic crisis. Given the incomplete internal economic structure and the external antagonism, the current crisis is unavoidable.¶ For how long the devaluation of the ruble continues is determined by what financial policies the Russian government will carry out and what solutions could be decided between Russia and the West over the Ukrainian crisis. Russia, which has long suffered from economic sanctions, can hardly retain the stability of its currency.¶ Despite the fact that the weakening ruble has almost broken the bottom line the Russian market can bear, it doesn't necessarily mean the Russian economy will collapse. Even though Russia is experiencing an economic winter, it can still hold on. First, Russia is a big power. Its vast territory and rich resources give it a tenacious power to endure economic difficulties. History proves that rich resources can push the Russian economy back to the right track.¶ Although the economic structure is yet to improve and Russia is overdependent on international energy prices, Russia, after 23 years of economic development since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, has accumulated considerable foreign exchange reserves and become richer. The public can bear a short-term economic slowdown, which is totally different from the situation in the 1990s.¶ The current crisis, partly stemming from Western sanctions, is characterized by rivalry between Russia and the West. Traditionally, when the Russian people meet hardline adversaries, they will become more determined. Educated with a sense of patriotism, the public has the determination to resist the pressure.¶ The Russian government is adjusting its foreign policies. On the one hand, it aims to seek new diplomatic breakthroughs. Emerging economies such as China, India and Iran are among the highlights of its diplomacy. On the other hand, it is also seeking the proper moment to adjust its policies toward the West, including its stance on the Ukrainian crisis. The West has the same intention, too. Such adjustments will help ease the economic climate.¶ The current ruble crisis shows the Russian economy is facing the most severe test and the possibility that the ruble continues to decline cannot be excluded. But from a long-term perspective, the Russian economy will not collapse.
Russia's recent activities have captured the attention of the world.¶ Its role in destabilizing Ukraine has earned it economic sanctions from the U.S. and the European Union. And Russia has returned fire with economic sanctions of its own, including sweeping bans on food imports from the West.¶ While these sanctions are likely to affect Russia and some of its trading partners materially, they are also likely to have a surprisingly small impact on the global economy as a whole.¶ "In principle, the size of Russia’s economy — less than 3% of global GDP — suggests a limited impact on the global economy," writes Barclays' Christian Keller.¶ Keller offered this eyeopening chart (see below) of how Russia fits into the bigger picture. As you can see, Russia accounts for less than 2% of the world's imports. The financial industry's exposure to Russia is also quite small.¶ Relative to the U.S. and other developed economies, the EU has much more at risk. And it certainly doesn't help the EU that its economic recovery story has been falling apart.¶ Still, the EU's exposure to Russia is small. Exports to Russia account for less than 3% of total exports. Even food exports to Russia account for just a fraction of a percent of total exports.¶ "By themselves, Russia-related sanctions should not have much impact on the global economy," Keller said.¶ Having said that, Keller warns that an "escalating tit-for-tat trade war" would certainly make things worse.¶ Yes, the state of relations between Russia and the rest of the world is not good. But it isn't the end of the world.
The United States is back, and ready to drive global growth in 2015.¶ After long struggling to claw its way out of the Great Recession, the world's biggest economy is on an extended win streak that is edging it closer to full health. But the new year doesn't look quite so bright in other major countries.¶ China is slowing as it transitions from investment to consumption. Japan has slid into a recession. Russia appears headed for one. Europe is barely growing.¶ And the U.S.?¶ Six years after its financial system nearly sank and nearly that long since the recession ended, the United States is expected to grow in 2015 at its fastest pace in a decade. Its expansion from July through September — a 5 percent annual rate — was the swiftest for any quarter since 2003.¶ That pace will likely ease a bit. Still, the economy is expected to expand 3.1 percent next year, according to a survey by the National Association for Business Economics. It would be the first year of 3 percent growth since 2005.¶ The acceleration of U.S. growth is a key reason the global economy is also expected to grow faster, at about 3 percent, up from 2.5 percent in 2014, according to economists at JPMorgan Chase and IHS Global Insight.¶ Cheering cheaper oil¶ Plunging oil prices are a big reason for the optimism. Prices have been cut roughly in half since summer. In some areas of the country, gasoline prices have slipped below $2 a gallon. The drop, along with more fuel-efficient cars, will save the average U.S. household $550 on gas next year, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. That means consumers have more to spend on items like cars, furniture and appliances.¶ What's more, Americans' finances are in firmer shape. Job growth is accelerating. Businesses are investing in buildings and software, and home building is expected to pick up.¶ Lower oil prices will also help Europe and Japan, and the global economy should expand faster than it did this year, economists say. But the divergence between the United States and most of the rest of the world is striking and carries some risks. Big exporters, from China to Germany to Japan, will depend heavily on a recovering U.S. to boost their economies.
Although the third-quarter Commerce Department report was a pleasant surprise, most forecasts call for gross domestic product — the value of all goods and services produced in the country — to be lower but still healthy near or above 3%. That's a rate not achieved for a full year since the Great Recession.¶ The economy remains a long way from full employment, Zandi said, but job growth now averaging around 225,000 a month should be enough for the next 18 months to absorb the number of under-employed and unemployed, which together account for about 1.25% of the labor market.¶ Even before mid-2016, wage growth, long a missing ingredient from the U.S. recovery, should take hold and reach 3.5% before inflation over the next two years, around 2% after inflation.¶ Improved moods among consumers could mean more purchases of cars and other big-ticket items that already are back to pre-recession levels.¶ GM Arlington, Texas, plant still running hard¶ GM workers along the production line at the General Motors Assembly Plant in Arlington, Texas. (Louis DeLuca / Dallas Morning News)¶ Morgan Stanley expects the still-struggling housing sector to bounce back with 10.2% growth in residential investment. The 1.8% growth for the just-completed year was hampered by a difficult winter, an uptick in mortgage rates and tight lending standards that only now are starting to ease.¶ Moody's also noted that nearly 3 million millennials — those 18 to 34 years old — moved in with their parents since the start of the recession seven years ago, and they represent pent-up demand for housing.¶ Analysts expect that only the energy sector, hurt by a plunge in oil prices, will lag behind.
The U.S. economy flexed its old muscles in 2014.¶ More than five years removed from the Great Recession, worries had taken hold that perhaps the world's largest economy had slid into a semi-permanent funk.¶ Consumers, businesses and investors, after enduring a brutal winter, showed renewed vigor as the year wore on and set the United States apart from much of the world.¶ Stocks repeatedly set record highs. Employers were on pace to add nearly 3 million jobs, the most in 15 years. Sinking oil prices cut gasoline costs to their lowest levels since May 2009. Auto sales accelerated. Inflation was a historically low sub-2 percent.¶ The U.S. economy proved it could thrive even as the Federal Reserve ended its bond buying program, which had been intended to aid growth by holding down long-term loan rates.¶ All told, the United States remained insulated from the financial struggles surfacing everywhere from Europe and Latin America to China, Japan and Russia.¶ So what explained the U.S. economy's resilience this year?¶ Economists say it largely reflected the delayed benefits of finally mending the damage from the worst downturn in nearly 80 years. Unlike past recoveries that enjoyed comparatively swift rebounds, this one proved agonizingly slow. It took 6½ years to regain all the jobs lost the recession — 8.7 million — far longer than during previous recoveries.¶ "It was a healing process from a severe recession and the financial crisis," said Richard Moody, chief economist at Regions Financial, a bank based in Alabama.¶ The healing isn't complete. Wage growth remains lackluster and has barely outpaced extremely low inflation. Home building has been tepid.¶ But worries earlier this year that the economy might be trapped indefinitely by sluggish growth have largely faded. Here are the economic highlights of 2014:¶ — HIRING BOOM¶ Employers added 2.65 million jobs over the first 11 months of the year, and the unemployment rate sank to 5.8 percent from 6.7 percent. When the government announces the December job data next month, the 2014 job total is expected to be just shy of 3 million — the most since the dot-com era in 1999. Compared with recent years, those gains have been less concentrated in lower-paying industries such as retail, food service and temp agencies.¶ "We're finally entering that virtuous cycle phase of the expansion" when more jobs lead to higher incomes, which generates more consumer spending and growth, said Brett Ryan, an economist at Deutsche Bank.¶ Though average wage growth has been modest, the number of people with paychecks — and the ability to spend — has soared. If you exclude the economy's winter-induced 2.1 percent annual contraction in the first quarter of the year, annualized growth has averaged 4.4 percent in four of the past five quarters. That's far above the historic average of roughly 3.2 percent in the decades after World War II.¶ — STOCKS SURGE¶ Stocks extended their bullish stampede of nearly six years. The Standard & Poor's 500 index climbed about 13 percent this year, hitting record highs more than 50 times. If you bought the index at a market bottom in March 2009, you've basically tripled your money. Corporate mergers helped drive this year's gains, along with major companies buying up $400 billion-plus of their own stock.¶ —OIL PRICES PLUNGE¶ In a gift for U.S. consumers, energy got significantly cheaper. Crude oil prices were essentially cut in half from this year's high. The slowing economies in Europe and Asia curbed demand, while production remained steady. The price decline trickled down to gasoline pumps. Average prices nationwide dropped to $2.32 a gallon, down roughly a dollar from a year ago, according to AAA. Some of that price slowdown has hurt U.S. oil producers, which must weigh layoffs. But overall, cheaper oil is a positive. Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen noted that the falling prices resemble a tax cut, generating savings for consumers that can be spent elsewhere to drive economic growth.¶ — AUTOS SALES UP¶ Far more Americans splurged on a new car after having held onto aging vehicles during the recession and slow early stages of the recovery. Sales were on track to increase 6 percent this year, with 16.5 million new vehicles on the road, according to Cars.com. That would be the best sales pace since 2006.¶ —INTEREST RATES DROP¶ Even as the economy has strengthened — usually a sign that interest rates will rise — it's become easier to borrow. More loans mean more spending and faster growth. Rates have declined even though the Fed ended its program to stimulate growth by buying billions in Treasury and mortgage bonds each month.¶ The yield on the 10-year Treasury note has slipped to about 2.27 percent from 3 percent when the year began. The average 30-year fixed mortgage is 3.83 percent, down from roughly 4.5 percent a year ago.
Our research shows that the overall size of the US industrial base – real value-added in manufacturing – has been growing rapidly for more than four decades, and is on track to surpass the all-time 2006-7 high before the end of 2014.¶ In contrast to other researchers, we show that US manufacturing growth is broad-based and includes subsectors such as transportation equipment, medical equipment, machinery, semiconductors, communications equipment and motor vehicles, as well as computers and electronics.¶ Moreover, contrary to widespread hand-wringing about weakening competitive performance on the part of US firms and workers, productivity in the manufacturing sector has been growing, both absolutely and relative to other sectors of the US economy.¶ At the same time, the most recent data show that the productivity growth in US manufacturing is also strong in comparison to other countries.¶ Finally, our research shows clearly that increased offshoring of manufacturing operations by US multinationals is associated with increases in the size and strength of their manufacturing activities in the US.¶ Indeed, the preponderance of net job loss in the US manufacturing sector comes within companies that stay at home and do not invest abroad. Of particular note is the large feedback to US R&D and other high-skilled services from outward investment on the part of US manufacturing multinationals.¶ Looking beyond employment data in US manufacturing¶ President Obama is the latest in a succession of political leaders who resolve that the US must find ways to strengthen the manufacturing sector and make it more competitive. Between 2000 and 2011, manufacturing jobs declined from 17.3 million to 11.6 million – a decline of 5.7 million or some 33%. There has been a slight increase in total manufacturing employment since 2010, with 12.0 million manufacturing jobs reported for 2013. This is still about a 30% decline, however, relative to 2000.¶ But this decline in manufacturing jobs is not because the size of the US manufacturing base is shrinking. Real value-added in manufacturing grew by 3.1% per year over the entire period 1960-2007, and after a dip during the recession recovered with 4% per year growth from 2010 through 2013. Even with a growth rate no higher than 2.8% per year, the absolute size of the US industrial base – total value-added in manufacturing – will surpass the all-time 2006-2007 high before the end of 2014.¶ Some authors – notably Martin Baily and Barry Bosworth (2014) – argue that this US manufacturing output growth has been driven primarily by one subsector – computers and electronics. But when we investigate the heterogeneity within the US manufacturing sector, we find that a number of other subsectors, including transportation equipment, medical equipment, machinery, semiconductors, communications equipment, and motor vehicles all grew at rates well above the manufacturing sector average.¶ Not only is the US manufacturing base becoming bigger than ever but the productivity of firms and workers in manufacturing leads the rest of the US economy in growing stronger. Total factor productivity and labour productivity in the manufacturing sector have been growing faster in the manufacturing sector than in the economy as a whole. At the same time, the most recent data show that the productivity growth in US manufacturing is strong not just relative to other sectors within the US, but also in comparison to other countries. In 2010 and 2011 (the most recent years for which data are available), the share of manufacturing value-added in total US GDP grew by 2.19%, while the total global share of manufacturing value-added in world income fell by 0.99%. Thus, the US is in a very strong position to compete globally in the manufacturing sector, even with sluggish employment numbers.¶ But major policy questions – particularly important in contemporary Washington – remain. What is the role of outward investment by US manufacturing companies in the evolution of the US industrial base? Might US firms and workers in the manufacturing sector be even larger and more competitive in the domestic economy if US manufacturing firms did less investing abroad?¶ The impact of offshoring by US multinationals on US domestic output, investment, and employment¶ To investigate the impact of outward investment by manufacturing multinationals on their operations at home, we use comprehensive firm-level data collected by the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to empirically identify what happens when an individual firm expands its operations abroad. We employ panel regression methods with data on all US MNCs over a 20-year time period. We include firm-fixed effects that hold constant everything that is unique about a given firm, isolating how its employment in the US and the other variables we examine change when it increases its outward FDI. Thus, all the characteristics that define a given firm – such as the industry it operates in, its size, its relative market power, etc. – are controlled for and do not confound the results. We also include year-fixed effects, which hold constant everything external to the firm that was going on in a given year, thus removing any potential impact of recessions and booms.¶ We track the changes in employment, sales, capital investment, and R&D in the US that are associated with offshoring and other types of foreign expansion by US firms. In a novel exercise, we compare the outcomes for manufacturing multinationals strictly defined and service multinationals with manufacturing operations. This latter investigation improves upon existing studies of pure manufacturing firms. We include firms for which the majority of US operations are classified as services, including high value activities such as R&D, engineering, IT services, marketing and management, but which also offshore manufacturing production. By analysing these kinds of firms, we are able to assess how offshoring of manufacturing impacts domestic services within the same firm.¶ Figure 1 shows the results broken down by the primary industry of operations in the US and in the foreign affiliates of the US firms. The top panel of Figure 1 shows the results only for strictly defined manufacturing firms, that is, firms that primarily focus on manufacturing both in their US headquarters and at their foreign affiliates. The bottom panel looks at firms that primarily focus on services at their US headquarters, but that also perform manufacturing activities abroad, and shows what happens to these firms when they expand manufacturing sales or employment at their foreign affiliates.¶ The first thing to note about these results is that they are all positive. Thus, by any measure, expansion abroad by a US-based MNC is associated with domestic US expansion by the same firm. The foreign operations of these firms are complements to – not substitutes for – domestic US operations.¶ While all types of offshoring are associated with increased activity in the US, some particularly important patterns emerge.¶ First, the overseas expansion of US manufacturing firms is accompanied by a positive and significant increase in employment at home.¶ Of course, this positive relationship does not emerge in each and every case. Some plants may close, other plants may open, and the composition of jobs within plants may change. But our results show that the creation of jobs by US multinationals abroad and the expansion of sales by US multinationals abroad are both associated with overall more jobs at home. Indeed, the preponderance of net job loss in the US manufacturing sector comes within companies that stay at home and do not invest abroad.¶ Figure 1. Relationship between foreign manufacturing expansion and domestic manufacturing and service activities of US MNCs¶ oldenski fig1 8 aug¶ Notes: Based on regressions using BEA firm-level data from 1990-2009. All results are statistically significant at the 1% level. All specifications include firm- and year-fixed effects.¶ Second, it is notable that the largest benefits from offshoring manufacturing tasks accrue to US R&D.¶ For example, a 10% increase in manufacturing employment at foreign affiliates of US firms is associated with a 6.2% increase in the amount of US R&D spending at the firms doing the offshoring. When the US site is primarily focused on R&D and other services, increasing manufacturing offshoring by 10% leads to a 10.8% increase in the amount of US R&D spending at that firm. When manufacturing offshoring is measured using sales by foreign affiliates, rather than employment, the increases in domestic R&D spending associated with a 10% increase abroad are 13.2% for service-focused US facilities. In other words, international expansion by US firms does not reduce their domestic activities. Instead, it is accompanied by increases in investment at home, and these increases are the largest for R&D spending.¶ Finally, our results reveal that when manufacturing tasks are offshored, much of the gain for the US shows up back within the US domestic service sector.¶ Oldenski (2012) has shown that US MNCs offshore their relatively more routine tasks but keep the most complex and non-routine tasks in the US. This specialization is not surprising based on the strong US comparative advantage in more highly-skilled and non-routine tasks such as innovation, engineering, and management rather than routine tasks such as basic assembly. Further work by Oldenski (2014) demonstrates that this specialization, according to comparative advantage, results in the creation of more highly-skilled, high-wage jobs in the US.¶ There is no dispute that the data show that aggregate employment in the US manufacturing sector has declined since 2000. But such observed decline in domestic employment cannot be traced to the overseas expansion of US firms because of our clear confirmation that offshoring is accompanied by domestic expansion on the part of the firms that are doing the offshoring. Other factors, such as recessions, new technologies or changes in demand must be the culprits in domestic job destruction. Quite to the contrary, if US MNCs had not undertaken the external investments and external job creation that they did during this period, the results in Figure 1 indicate that US domestic employment at US MNCs would be lower, not higher.¶ Conclusions¶ A careful look at the most recent and detailed data shows that despite falling employment, the US manufacturing base is growing larger, more productive, and more competitive. The results of our empirical analysis show that the expansion of operations abroad by US manufacturing multinationals leads to particularly strong increases in economic activity – including creation of greater numbers of high-paying manufacturing jobs – by those same firms in the US domestic economy. The policy implications are clear – any measures that the US might take to hinder or dis-incentivize outward expansion by US firms would lead to less robust economic activity – and fewer good US jobs at home, not more.
In 1990, the manufacturing industry employed more workers than any other sector in 36 states. Today, the picture is totally different: Manufacturing is the dominant industry in only seven states.¶ What happened? A few recessions, the rise of off-shoring and imports from China and the rest of the world and the explosion of the health-care industry, to begin with. Over the last two decades, employment in the manufacturing sector has plummeted, from nearly 18 million jobs in 1990 to just over 12 million jobs today. (Update: A smart reader points out that the decline in manufacturing jobs is actually more closely tied to automation rather than offshoring. The U.S. is manufacturing more now than it ever has, but much of that work can be done by machines — which don’t require salaries or health care coverage.)¶ In place of those missing manufacturing jobs, the health-care and social assistance industries have nearly doubled in size, from 9.1 million in 1990 to just over 18 million today, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Today, the health care and social assistance industries are the largest employers in 34 states.¶ The transition from a manufacturing-dominated economy to a health care-driven economy wasn’t direct. As manufacturing jobs declined in the middle of the 1990s, retail trade jobs took over. By 2003, retail employers were the largest source of jobs in 21 states. Retail jobs were hit hard by the recession; between 2008 and 2009, 13 states went from retail-dominant to health care-dominant.
President Barack Obama has said the US manufacturing sector is growing faster than any other economy and is now in a good position to create jobs.¶ "For decades, manufacturing was the essential ingredient in building our middle class. It was a bargain that involved more than just building things, it reflected the values that this country stood for," Obama said yesterday in a speech in Clinton City in Tennessee.¶ "Over time, technology made some jobs obsolete. Globalisation and additional foreign competition meant that some jobs went overseas", Obama added.¶ American manufacturing lost about one-third of its jobs in the last decade, and the middle class paid the price," the president noted referring to the impact of globalisation, competition and economic recession on the manufacturing sector.¶ "So when I took office, I believed, that if the last decade was characterised by outsourcing, I wanted to define this decade for insourcing making sure that the United States was competitive and that businesses wanted to locate here and that we had a dynamic manufacturing sector and research and development sector to support that manufacturing so that we could reverse some of those trends," Obama said.¶ "So we invested in clean energy, saved the auto industry, and today, factories are opening their doors at the fastest pace in almost two decades," he said.¶ "Manufacturing is actually in its best stretch of job creation since the 1990s. It added about 7,86,000 jobs over the past 58 months. Manufacturing is actually growing faster than the rest of the economy," Obama said.¶ "Right here in Tennessee, manufacturing jobs have jumped by about 11 per cent," Obama said as he announced launching of a network of manufacturing hubs across the country.¶ "We are launching these hubs around the country, and the concept is simple. We bring businesses, research universities, community colleges, state, local and federal governments together, and we figure out, where are some key opportunities for manufacturing in the future, how do we get out in front of the curve, how do we make sure everybody is working together," he said.
WESSEL: Well, that's a good question. So basically, factories have added more than 300,000 jobs in the past two years, and that's pretty good news - certainly better than losing jobs. But it would take two million more jobs to get manufacturing back to where it was in 2007 before the recession. Factories are managing to produce more without hiring a lot more workers, because they're getting more productive; technology, reorganization, making people work harder, making them work smarter. It's all made for a remarkable surge of productivity. Factories get 40 percent more output out of every out of work today, compared to what they got 10 years ago. MONTAGNE: Still though, if sales keep growing, would factories not hire more? Maybe not as many workers as they had before, but more, and couldn't that be one part of the answer, at least, to the jobs problem? WESSEL: Well, it would definitely be one part, but it's a small part. For all the romance about manufacturing, we are no longer a manufacturing economy when it comes to jobs. Only nine percent of the jobs in America today are in manufacturing. It just isn't big enough to put Americans back to work. Even if factory employment doubled, which isn't going to happen, that wouldn't be enough new jobs to put all the 13 million unemployed people back to work. So yes, it's a plus. But no, it's not enough to solve our unemployment problem.
Surging Capacity Keeps Prices Down, At Least Stable¶ Progress in the steel industry in recent years has undergone a healthy recovery no doubt, though any benchmarks analysts use to describe that recovery invariably are compared to the progress it could have experienced had the 2008 Wall Street collapse and subsequent Great Recession never happened.¶ “[An] approximately $500 billion annual spend rate pre-recession fell to about $330 billion, and now it’s up to about $410 billion,” John Anton, manager of IHS Steel Service, told My Purchasing Center. “It’s come up a lot, but it still has a long way to go. Our forecast has it getting back to pre-recession level by the end of 2016. It’s a ‘half-empty, half-full’ scenario. The half-full part is things are rising rather quickly. The half-empty part is you’re still not sending nearly as much steel to construction as you did pre-recession. Certainly more than you did two years ago, but not what you sent in 2007 and early 2008.”
Isolationism is not protectionism. And confusing the two can create a false impression of the trajectory of U.S. global engagement in the year ahead.¶ New polling data showing that the American public is turning inward, preoccupied with domestic affairs and less interested in international engagement, is not evidence of a rise in U.S. economic protectionism, with its grave consequences for global business. Indeed, even as their doubts grow over the future U.S. geopolitical role, Americans say that the benefits from U.S. participation in the global economy outweigh the risks. And even as they harbor doubts about the impact of trade agreements on wages and jobs, public support for closer trade and business ties with other nations stands at its highest point in more than a decade.¶ The Obama administration’s disengagement from Iraq and Afghanistan, its “leading from behind” in Libya and its reluctance to become involved in the Syrian civil war all reflect a broad public reassessment of America’s future security role in the world. But the White House’s pursuit of the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, two unprecedented trade deals, equally reflect Americans’ newfound acceptance of the importance – or at least inevitability – of U.S. economic integration with the rest of the world.¶ Still, 2014 could well prove to be a year when the United States is less globally engaged geopolitically, even while it is more engaged economically.¶ Americans say that the country does too much to solve world problems, and increasingly they want their leaders to pay more attention to problems at home. About half the public see the United States as overextended abroad, according to a recent Pew Research Center survey. When asked to describe why they feel this way, nearly half cite problems at home, including the economy, which they say should get more attention instead.¶ More from GPS: Americans see declining U.S. prestige¶ And such skepticism about international engagement has increased. Currently, about half the public says the United States “should mind its own business internationally and let other countries get along the best they can on their own.” Such public international ennui has waxed and waned at various times in recent history, most notably after the Vietnam War. But this is the most lopsided split in favor of the U.S. “minding its own business” in the nearly 50 years this question has been asked.¶ Yet the American public expresses no such reluctance about U.S. involvement in the global economy. About three-in-four Americans say that growing trade and business ties between the United States and other countries are good for the nation. And such support for increased trade and business connections has increased 24 percentage points since 2008.¶ Moreover, at a time of deep partisan divides on many issues, Americans are united in endorsing global economic engagement. Solid majorities of Republicans, Democrats and independents describe increased international trade and business ties as good for the U.S.¶ By more than two-to-one, Americans also see more benefits than risks from greater involvement in the global economy. This includes large majorities across education and income categories, as well as most Republicans, Democrats and independents.¶ To be sure, the public has worries about globalization. A 2010 Pew Research Center survey found that a majority of the public said free trade agreements lead to job losses. And a plurality said that free trade deals lower wages. Nevertheless, majorities wanted to increase trade with both Europe and Japan – the principal participants in the current transatlantic and transpacific trade negotiations.¶ And Americans are of two minds about foreign investment. Amid forecasts of massive new Chinese investment in the United States over the next decade, a majority says that more foreign companies setting up operations in the United States would mostly help the economy. But nearly three-quarters think that the economy would be hurt if more U.S. companies move their operations abroad.¶ So what does all this suggest? The prophecies of America’s retreat from the world are premature. Americans may want a less forward-leaning geopolitical posture in the world, but they still support greater U.S. global economic engagement with it.
So, how does one explain that through the interdependence argument? The realist correlation seems to be right but, as David Copeland argues in his International Security article (Vol 20, no 4; Spring 1996), “trade levels had been high for the previous 30 years [in the run-up to WWI]; hence, even if interdependence was a necessary condition for the war, it was not sufficient.” Copeland offers a different approach and calls it a theory of trade expectations: “Trade expectations theory introduces a new causal variable, the expectations of future trade, examining its impact on the overall expected value of the trading option if a state decides to forgo war. This supplements the static consideration in liberalism and realism of the levels of interdependence at any point in time, with the importance of leaders’ dynamic expectations into the future. “Levels of interdependence and expectations of future trade, considered simultaneously, lead to new predictions. Interdependence can foster peace, as liberals argue, but this will only be so when states expect that trade levels will be high into the foreseeable future. If highly interdependent states expect that trade will be severely restricted — that is, if their expectations for future trade are low — realists are likely to be right: the most highly dependent states will be the ones most likely to initiate war, for fear of losing the economic wealth that supports their long-term security. In short, high interdependence can be either peace-inducing or war-inducing, depending on the expectations of future trade.” The good news, however, is that trade is inevitable. To put it simply, until there is a seller and a buyer, trade will happen. There is empirical data to support this, compiled by Katherine Barbieri. Barbieri also co-authored with Jack Levy an article in the Journal of Peace Research (Vol 36, no 4, 1999), captioned, “Sleeping with the Enemy: The Impact of War on Trade”. Barbieri and Levy maintain that “there are numerous historical cases of trading with the enemy during wartime, including trade in strategic goods that directly affect the ability of a state to prosecute the war.” Trade will continue even when states are at war. While dyadic trade will be negatively impacted, trade through third parties and circuitously will continue. This is not to say that states must fight or that trade through third parties in such circumstances is preferable to dyadic trade. The point is that empirical data does not support the central tenet of the liberal theory that trade promotes peace or the realist assumption that states, because of vulnerability, will snap those ties. If there’s a demand for item X made by state Y in state Z, X will get to Z, regardless of the conditions of war and peace. This is also borne out by informal trade linkages between Pakistan and India, especially trade through third parties.
Before asking whether it makes sense to continue to invest in aircraft carriers, we must ask the question whether we can afford them. The Pentagon commissioned the USS George H.W. Bush in 2009 at a cost of $6.1 billion. America's most recent aircraft carrier, the USS Gerald R. Ford, will cost more than double that in constant dollars. The carriers' air wings cost about 70 percent again the cost of the ship itself. In an era when personnel costs  —  including healthcare and pensions  —  are consuming the military from within, the fact that these craft require 46 percent of the Navy's personnel to man and support places them in the crosshairs in an extreme budget-constrained environment. The Center for Budgetary and Strategic Assessments stated that being the most expensive piece of military equipment in the world makes "them a prime  —  and perhaps even a necessary target  —  in this era of belt tightening." If 11 carriers  —  as required by legislation  —  is the minimal number required to have an effective supercarrier force, then carrier proponents are hoist upon their own petard. "If our fleet of small numbers is so fragile that it cannot afford the loss of a single ship due to budgeting, how will it survive the inevitable losses of combat?" Commander Phillip E. Pournelle wrote in Proceedings. That day has already come. As of early 2014, the Navy only has 10 operational supercarriers. Sequestration delayed the deployment of the Harry S. Truman and has the Navy scrambling to come up with funds to refuel the Abraham Lincoln, raising the question whether the latter will ever come back into service. It appears dubious that the Ford will have overcome major development issues to come into service in 2016. Furthermore, if sequestration persists, the Navy might have to mothball four of nine air wings, making the discussion of 11 carrier platforms moot. Due to these substantial constraints, the Congressional Budget Office and former Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel both floated the possibility of the Navy going down to as few as eight supercarriers. The Navy, like the other services, has proven itself incapable of running an effective weapons acquisition program in recent decades. Instead, the services pay increasingly more money for progressively fewer units that often fail to meet original specifications. The current shipbuilding plan calls for the Navy to have 306 ships while the actual number has dwindled 285. The CBO recently concluded that there is approximately a 30 percent gap between what the Navy would require to meet its shipbuilding plan and what it will likely obtain through the appropriation process. The Navy's own acquisitions chief recently told Congress that given the current trends and budget outlook, the Navy could slip to as few as 240 ships in the next several decades.
The famed Adm. Horatio Nelson observed that "a ship's a fool to fight a fort." In the new age that is dawning, the "fort" is an increasingly sophisticated range of over-the-horizon anti-ship missiles that render surface ships vulnerable, and which will deny them proximity to the coastlines where U.S. carriers have reigned for decades. These include ballistic missiles fired from a wide range of platforms, including easy to conceal mobile launchers. In a sweeping 2013 paper on the carrier's future, Navy Capt. Henry Hendrix estimated China could produce 1,227 DF-21D ballistic anti-ship missiles for the cost of a single U.S. carrier. Although one missile might not sink a carrier, a single missile might cause sufficient damage to take it out of commission. Further, the radar signature of a 100,000-ton ship is very large and the sensors used on the carrier's current defense systems only increase that signature. In such an attack, the fleet must be able to defend against a large number of incoming weapons approaching on evasive trajectories at greater than twice the speed of sound, while the attacker needs to only score a few hits. These new anti-ship missiles "put U.S. forces on the wrong side of physics," the U.S. Naval War College's Andrew Erickson warned. Emerging anti-ship technology also places the aircraft carrier on the wrong side of basic arithmetic. In its capacity as a force projection platform, the carrier operates by launching various types of attack and tactical fighter aircraft from its decks. The unrefueled radius of the Navy's current F/A-18E Super Hornet falls within 390–450 nautical miles. The F-35 Joint Strike Fighter will have an unrefueled combat radius of 730 nautical miles. The Department of Defense, however, estimates that the range of the DF-21D anti-ship missile to be 1,500–1,750 nautical miles and some speculate the range to be greater. Recognizing the fact that these numbers will require placing the carrier strike groups well outside of their range, former Naval War College Dean Robert Rubel observed that "a successful defense of a carrier does no good if the carrier cannot in turn succeed in attacking enemy naval forces." Although a sustained attack from land-based ballistic missiles would be more than a challenge for the Navy's current "hard kill" defense systems, the situation is potentially more serious. The Navy's plan to disrupt ballistic missile command-and-control systems with electronic measures would be inhibited by the same "range" arithmetic that keeps such craft far from shore. "Even more ominous," military analyst Robert Haddick wrote, "are the squadrons of maritime strike fighters capable of launching scores of long-range, high-speed anti-ship cruise missiles, in volumes that threaten to overwhelm the most modern fleet defenses." A reality-check exercise would be to conduct a theoretical battle with the rapidly developing People's Liberation Army Navy. The Chinese have around 100 fast missile boats  —  primarily of the Hubei class with stealth catamaran hulls  —  that carry eight anti-ship cruise missiles with current ranges of 160 nautical miles. A coordinated attack would also likely include aircraft and Sovremenny-class destroyers and, in the next decade, an estimated 75–80 submarines  —  both nuclear and diesel  —  armed with torpedoes and some with wave skimming, supersonic anti-ship missiles supplied by or copied from advanced Russian models. Russia has been developing sea- and bomber-launched anti-ship missiles for decades. Russia is also a major arms merchant, making these anti-access systems potentially among its most attractive wares. In addition, those that are not purchased could also be reverse-engineered. Iran has, for obvious reasons, a very strong interest in and an unknown arsenal of such weapons. As the costs of these weapons come down, the rate of proliferation will increase and place this technology in the hands of smaller states and potentially non-state groups. With such proliferation, the latitude of carrier task groups to own the coastlines along which they wish to operate in a power projection role will evaporate.
First place on the list is no surprise: the United States Navy. The U.S. Navy has the most ships by far of any navy worldwide. It also has the greatest diversity of missions and the largest area of responsibility. No other navy has the global reach of the U.S. Navy, which regularly operates in the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian Oceans, as well as the Mediterranean, Persian Gulf and the Horn of Africa. The U.S. Navy also forward deploys ships to Japan, Europe and the Persian Gulf. The U.S. Navy has 288 battle force ships, of which typically a third are underway at any given time. The U.S. Navy has 10 aircraft carriers, nine amphibious assault ships, 22 cruisers, 62 destroyers, 17 frigates and 72 submarines. In addition to ships, the U.S. Navy has 3,700 aircraft, making it the second largest air force in the world. At 323,000 active and 109,000 personnel, it is also the largest navy in terms of manpower. What makes the U.S. Navy stand out the most is its 10 aircraft carriers—more than the rest of the world put together. Not only are there more of them, they’re also much bigger: a single Nimitz-class aircraft carrier can carry twice as many planes (72) as the next largest foreign carrier. Unlike the air wings of other countries, which typically concentrate on fighters, a typical U.S. carrier air wing is a balanced package capable of air superiority, strike, reconnaissance, anti-submarine warfare and humanitarian assistance/disaster relief missions. The U.S. Navy’s 31 amphibious ships make it the largest “gator” fleet in the world, capable of transporting and landing on hostile beaches. The nine amphibious assault ships of the Tarawa and Wasp classes can carry helicopters to ferry troops or act as miniature aircraft carriers, equipped with AV-8B Harrier attack jets and soon F-35B fighter-bombers. The U.S. Navy has 54 nuclear attack submarines, a mix of the Los Angeles, Seawolf, and Virginia classes. The U.S. Navy is also responsible for the United States’ strategic nuclear deterrent at sea, with 14 Ohio-class ballistic missile submarines equipped with a total of 336 Trident nuclear missiles. The USN also has four Ohio-class submarines stripped of nuclear missiles and modified to carry 154 Tomahawk land attack missiles.
The defense drawdown is now well underway, and the defense industry is starting to pack up, if one is to believe what is being said this week at the Paris Air Show.¶ Defense budgets peaked in FY 2010, including war funding, and have been down about 10 percent in constant dollars. Factor in the budget sequester for this year, which looks like it will hang on through the rest of the fiscal year (and maybe make a repeat appearance next January), and the defense budget will have fallen 24 percent in constant dollars from their height.¶ The future does not look different. If the sequester remains, one can expect another roughly $500 billion to disappear from projected defense budgets over the next nine years.¶ Oddly, defense contractors seem to be doing OK, so far. Sales had declined a bit even before sequestration set in, but profit margins are holding strong for the big guys — Lockheed Martin, General Dynamics, Raytheon, Boeing, Northrop Grumman, L3.¶ This apparent fiscal health is actually an economic Potemkin village. Profit margins may hold, but U.S. sales are clearly headed down. The illusion stems from the reality that the major defense contractors are still working on programs funded in previous years, when budgets were higher.¶ But as the U.S. defense budget heads down, DOD’s dollars to buy stuff will drop more quickly than the overall budget, as they have in every drawdown since the Korean War. Between FY 1985 and FY 1998, for example, the defense budget declined 31 percent in constant dollars, while funding for research and purchases of hardware fell 53 percent.¶ This reality is already apparent today — budgets for weapons research and acquisition, before the sequester, were already down nearly 20 percent in constant dollars since FY 2010, and, with the sequester, could decline nearly 30 percent.¶ I like to see the major defense contractors as the canaries in the budgetary coal mine — they get the earliest signal of a change in fiscal direction, and they start to react well ahead of the policymakers and elected officials, many of whom think that the party is going to last forever.¶ The industry response to the coming decline began several years ago. Major contractors sold or consolidated business units, entered new markets (largely through acquisitions), and trimmed the workforce. Northrop Grumman, for example, sold its Newport News shipyard in 2011, leading to the creation of an independent business — Huntington Shipyards.¶ Boeing is reducing its management workforce by 30 percent and has closed defense production operations in Kansas and California. L-3 sold its consulting and government services businesses. Lockheed Martin already began consolidation and cutbacks in its missile and training operations in 2012. Overall, aerospace industry employment, which grew through the past decade, began a predictable decline in 2012, in advance of any implementation of the sequester.¶ As in the past, when the U.S. market tails off, the big contractors prepare to leave the country, hoping that international markets will make up for the loss in sales volume in the United States. The latest straw in the wind is an increasingly aggressive industry push to make up overseas for the sales that are declining at home.¶ And the U.S. defense industry has products it urgently wants to sell overseas. Lockheed hopes its F-35 will have a big export market. It is, after all, being built in partnership with Britain, Turkey, Italy, and Denmark, among other countries, which are expected to buy it — that was the whole point of cooperative agreements on F-35 development and production. For Lockheed and the U.S. aerospace industry, F-35 international sales are critical; this is the only fifth-generation fighter on the international market. If it sells, it would guarantee a leading position for U.S. firms in the international fighter market for years to come.¶ The Paris Air Show — on this week — has made this shift abroad abundantly clear. Fighters aren’t the only market U.S. companies are leaving the country for. Capital Alpha analyst Byron Callen reports from Paris that Lockheed anticipates 150-200 overseas sales of its workhorse C-130J transport plane, 300 of which have already been sold in the United States and overseas. This aircraft almost died in the Pentagon’s last drawdown, but industry pressure saved it and the Air Force has been buying it ever since.¶ The competition is heating up for shorter-haul aircraft as well. Boeing and Embraer announced that they are combining forces to market the Brazilian KC-390 competitor in Europe and the Middle East. And EADS/Airbus is still hoping for global sales of its long-awaited A300M. As the belt tightens at home, the sales effort is expanding abroad for everyone.¶ Even with defense budgets shrinking in the United States and Europe, the increasingly sexy drone market is another prime export target. General Atomics, maker of the Predator and Reaper drones — which have been on full display overseas in Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Yemen — told the Paris crowd that it was heading into Europe. Predators and Reapers have already been sold to Britain and Italy, with French and German sales coming soon, according to Defense News. The industry drone push is spreading anxiety in the European defense industry. BAE (Britain), Dassault (France), and others have had joint drone research programs for about 20 years, as my colleague, the late Guy Ben-Ari, and I pointed out seven years ago. They have failed, so far, to produce a global competitor to the Predator/Reaper family. In desperation, Dassault, Italy’s Finmeccanica, and the continental European giant EADS combined forces at the start of the air show to appeal to European governments to put more money into indigenously developed drones, or risk losing the market to the U.S. firms. The three firms said they would join forces to build a medium-altitude, long endurance drone for the European market (they were silent on BAE’s role, maybe a side-effect of the failed effort to merge BAE and EADS late last year).¶ Spend more money, they said, so that "European sovereignty and independence in the management of information and intelligence… be guaranteed." A continental drone would "foster the development of high technologies and contribute to sustaining key competencies and jobs within Europe." Good luck with that as European defense budgets continue to fall.¶ The rush for the door marked "international sales" goes on and on. Boeing and Bell Helicopter companies are pushing the V-22 VSTOL transport plane into international markets, including Israel and the UAE, with prospects in Britain,¶ France, Canada, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Italy, Colombia, Brazil, India, Japan, and Singapore. This for a program that has lived the perilous life of Pauline in the U.S. Marine Corps budget for more than a decade, but which the Marines now say has performed well in Iraq and Afghanistan.¶ The U.S. government has been lower key in Paris this year, arguing that sequestration prevented it from flying its fighters at the air show. And even Northrop Grumman, from whose pavilion I watched the Paris show back in 1999, skipped it this year. Perhaps everyone already knows enough about its Global Hawk drone. Japan, South Korea, and Australia have been interested, and NATO is already buying five for its Air Ground Surveillance system.¶ Global hope springs eternal for U.S. defense contractors — the same bum rush was on in the 1990s during the last defense drawdown. And maybe there are a few niche opportunities, especially in the Middle East and Asia. But there is a long history of competition in these markets, a natural tendency for others — especially the Europeans — to circle the wagons around national and regional industries, reflecting an inevitable uneasiness about relying on the United States as a defense supplier.¶ In the end, there is a mirage-like quality to the global market from a contractor perspective. Smaller sales is the likely trend across all markets. Jobs and corporate success are both at stake, which has generally led the U.S. government to support international sales.¶ But this trend begs some critical policy questions. Pursuing economic self-interest is one goal — a healthy defense technology base is part of national security. Strengthening alliance relations is another — cooperating with important allies and partners is part of the national security mission. Security is a different goal: Selling into regions with significant conflict issues may help allies and the technology base, but it can also exacerbate tensions (the Middle East) and stimulate arms races that are already gathering steam (Southeast and East Asia). The defense industry has the first goal at the front of its attention as the U.S. market declines. The administration needs to strike a balance with the other two missions. As the market shrinks, these are the issues that will move to the front of the discussion.
For U.S. commercial airlines, 2014 was a banner year. Last year marked the fifth consecutive profitable year for airlines, during which time aggregate net income exceeded $30 billion. Record-low oil prices and new technologies have both played a big role in the industry’s steady growth. ¶ What’s next for aerospace? We’ve identified three major trends poised to disrupt aerospace in 2015. ¶ 1. Increased demand will put pressure on supply chains.¶ Along with diving fuel prices and rising demand for air travel, production rates for commercial airline manufacturers are increasing with no signs of slowing down. This increase in demand will place more pressure on every part of the supply chain. The challenge will be managing total costs and forecasting.¶ Look for more commercial airline manufacturers to outsource aspects of their production in order to stabilize supply chains. Contract manufacturing, because it is a long-term commitment with a more comprehensive scope, has the potential to create a more agile and stable supply chain in the wake of shifting market conditions.¶ 2. Boeing will continue to innovate with new products and services.¶ Boeing is one of the most well-known names in aerospace. In September 2014, the company continued its tradition of introducing new products and services to the market with the launch of the 737 MAX 200 plane.¶ Based on the 737 MAX 8 airframe, the 737 MAX 200 features up to 200 seats, modern sculpted sidewalls and window reveals, larger pivoting overhead storage bins, and LED lighting that enhances the sense of spaciousness. The 737 MAX 200 also features a longer airframe then its Boeing relatives, providing travelers more flexibility and space in the cabin. ¶ Europe’s leading low-cost carrier, Ryanair, will be the first airline to operate the 737 MAX 200. ¶ Boeing’s new aircraft opens up new opportunities to increase revenue potential for commercial carriers and provide an overall better, more comfortable customer experience. ¶ 3. Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) manufacturers will experience rapid growth.¶ Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), or drones, had quite a year in 2014—helping Amazon deliver packages, landing on the White House lawn and then being banned from Super Bowl XLIX.¶ While many are unsure whether mass production and usage of drones is a major security concern or a breakthrough to embrace (or a bit of both), the technology is poised to disrupt a variety of industries including agriculture and meteorology. ¶ For example, farmers’ processes for monitoring crops were traditionally tedious and inefficient. Farmers have long needed a better way to collect data on their crops so they can proactively manage potential problems, including insects, watering issues and wandering cattle. Drones fill the data collection gap for farmers.¶ Because of the many beneficial use cases for drones, we believe industries from farming to defense will contribute to the rapid growth of UAV manufacturers.¶ What other trends will impact the aerospace industry in 2015? Share your thoughts in the comments below.
American Airmen will also be transformed. The new Air Force will identify much less with platforms as virtually any computer, network, aircraft or spacecraft becomes a platform not only to acquire, move and process knowledge, but also to deliver long-range weapons. Tankers, airlifters and computers will be just as likely to deliver a killing blow as fighters and bombers have been in the past. As opposed to the vision of Skynet as a dispassionate, computerized, sentient being, the new Airman will be a cyber-aided warrior with tremendous reach. Aided by a global network that ties them into the “hive-mind,” Airmen will operate freely in the cognitive domain from anywhere on Earth as they securely share information across vast distances—giving Airmen prominence over the weapon systems they operate.
The creation of the Air Force in 1947 turned airpower into a zero-sum game for the U.S. military services. Aerospace innovations developed in one service threaten the turf of the other two. This leaves the Air Force to justify itself through explicit denigration of the contribution of the other services. Indeed, Dr. Lowther manages, in this short piece, to imply that soldiers are incapable of understanding aerial maps, and that the Navy can’t contribute to antiaccess warfare.
The Islamic State (also known as ISIS, ISIL, and Daesh) has lost key territory along the Turkish border — a frontier that it uses to funnel foreign fighters into its territory — and near Raqqa, the capital of its so-called "caliphate." A US-led anti-ISIS coalition has been using air strikes in an attempt to cripple [undermine] the terror group and to support local forces and militias fighting ISIS on the ground.
As Iraq and Syria Islamic State (ISIS) insurgent forces advance on Baghdad, some American political leaders, led by Sen. John McCain (R-AZ) and Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC), have urged that the United States begin airstrikes immediately to stop the growing unrest in Iraq. Although air power may be the only expedient and politically acceptable option, there are several reasons why that all-too-familiar impulse to use our asymmetric advantage in airpower will not defeat ISIS.
By any measure, our military power is unmatched, and that’s not likely to change anytime soon. In terms of sheer size, the United States spends more each year on defense than the next 10 nations put together. Our defense budget is more than five times bigger than that of our nearest competitor, China — despite that country’s rapid military buildup. Even after 13 years of war — the longest period of continuous conflict our armed forces have ever seen — we remain capable of defeating any adversary.
As I read his remarks, I kept wondering: Do we really need a military primed to go to war? I don’t think so. Rather, what we need to do is preserve essential skills and personnel. That might mean going to a cadre-like military, with only two Army divisions kept at high readiness, likely one light infantry and one armored, and the other eight active-duty divisions shrunk down but preserving their skills. That is, with fewer soldiers, but with good training for that smaller force. That might mean squads entirely of NCOs, trained to expand if and when necessary.
Nearly a decade and a half after the 9/11 attacks, there remains a key flaw in the ongoing U.S.-led "War on Terror:" Washington's response has been hyper-militarized, dominated by counter-terrorism and security, while other soft power instruments like public diplomacy have been under-invested in.
There is no military solution to terrorism. As David Miliband, a former British Foreign Minister, stated in 2009, “the war on terror was wrong”, and it brought “more harm than good”. It has also undermined the search for alternative, more successful approaches to countering violent extremism by giving the impression that only a military solution exists to counter violent extremism.
The frequent chatter about the inevitable decline of the United States has become almost an unchallenged shibboleth. Every week more bad news about the United States seems to confirm this notion. The country seems ungovernable with a hyper-partisanized Congress, a 16-day government shutdown, the weak economic recovery and the vast NSA spy scandal. In an international study, Americans ranked 11th in happiness and a discouraging 24th in economy. Another study of 8th graders found only 7 percent of American students rated advanced in mathematics compared to 47 and 48 percent in Singapore and South Korea. Our President, according to a Forbes power rating, even comes in second behind Vladimir Putin.
These two recent reports highlight the importance of foreign ministries as vital instruments of science diplomacy. These agencies of foreign affairs, like their counterparts around the world, are often viewed as conservative and somewhat inflexible institutions focused on stability rather than transformation. However, they are adjusting to a world in which developments in science and technology move rapidly and affect relationships and interactions at bilateral, regional, and global scales.
Why is the science not sufficient? The answer has a lot to do with scientific uncertainties. Some of these uncertainties arise when risk assessments are not based on studies directly on people or relevant features of our environment, but using models. Chemicals are often tested on rodents rather than people, for example, and climate change is studied using computer models rather than by experimenting on the atmosphere.
And yet, Obama’s soft power has achieved remarkable successes - enough for Paul Krugman, a Nobel Laureate in economics, to declare that Obama has been one of America’s effective presidents. In the second half of June, the Supreme Court handed him two remarkable victories. It affirmed his most important legacy, the Affordable Care Act, which is the greatest extension of America’s safety net since FDR. It also extended his policy of recognizing same-sex marriage at the Federal level.
Obama’s speech on Wednesday disappointed critics who expected to hear about stronger action and something of an Obama Doctrine. Instead, Obama warned against rash military actions while announcing additional financing for combatting extremists groups in the Middle East and Africa, while also pledging to “step up” support for Syrian rebels.
“People don’t remember, but when I came into office, the United States in world opinion ranked below China and just barely above Russia,” Barack Obama said on Monday. “And today, once again, the United States is the most respected country on earth.”
The results are entirely predictable. Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry repeatedly ruled out force or at least effective force (“boots on the ground”) while promising that conflicts can be resolved at the bargaining table. Obama did it with Syria, and Kerry insists diplomacy hasn’t failed, to the amazement of critics such as Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.). He did it with Russia (which remains ensconced in Ukraine). He is doing it with Iran. Absent force or the threat of force, these negotiations prove to be fruitless. And they have led us to a ridiculous war plan.
However, events in Ukraine have exposed the stark limits of soft power in a way that no analysis ever could. There is no small irony in the fact that Russia’s forceful military intervention into Ukraine was preceded by a grinding, if superficially velveted, tug of war between Moscow and the West over Ukraine’s integration with two competing soft-power “vehicles”—the EU and the Moscow-led Customs Union-cum-Eurasian Union. It was Yanukovych’s abandonment of Ukraine’s pledge to sign an Association Agreement with the EU—following intense Russian coercion—that protests began again in earnest. Yanukovych’s turn to brutality eventually precipitated his toppling, Russia’s military intervention, and now Crimea’s annexation.
“Showing up is 80 percent of life” remarked filmmaker and writer Woody Allen in 1977, a quote that if taken to heart could have saved the Barack Obama administration lot of woes and embarrassment in the way it approaches policy and politics across the globe. Obama’s failure to show up or send the vice or an ex-president to Paris’ massive rally on Sunday in solidarity with Charlie Hebdo and freedom of speech, vividly illustrates the decline of U.S. soft power and absence of American leadership on the global stage.
The White House just held a three-day summit exploring ways to “counter” violent extremists. It could have saved itself some time. The answer is simple:
The 2008 financial crisis tested our resilience and dealt a real blow to our international prestige and authority. Long-term challenges remain. But the fact is that no country comes close to matching our fundamental economic strength. The U.S. economy is built on a sound structural foundation, combining an entrepreneurial orientation, deep and efficient capital markets, highly experienced managers, and strong technological leadership.
The odds favor the US not only because it is technologically more advanced and innovative than China at the moment, with an income per capita more than six times that of China. They do so also because innovation ultimately depends on a country’s institutions.
America remains a leader in science and technology. While the quality overall of its educational systems is far from exceptional, most studies rank elite US universities as among the best in the world.
While China’s buildup is a leading reason for this challenge to our military superiority, it is not the only one. Rather, we also find ourselves at this juncture through a combination of a foolishly constricting approaches to defense planning manifested by five years of defense cuts, including sequestration; a two-decade sanguinity about the true challenge to our military edge posed by China’s impressive military modernization; and, a refusal to ensure that our capabilities within the U.S. defense portfolio are militarily sufficient in quantity and diversity to maintain asymmetric superiority for full-spectrum warfare. Together, this lack of focus and indiscipline has helped allow countries like China to begin materially closing the once-yawning gap in military capability.
How does this relate to a self driving car? The human mind has the mother of all shortcuts for dealing with vast amounts of data. Rather than have to learn, store and retrieve the patterns for every conceivable type of road, we only have to learn one thing: the idea of what a road is. What would require a computer to sift through terabytes of information, we accomplish with a single, not terribly complex (for us) idea. Once we have that idea we can not only recognize and navigate any passable road but we can also navigate a car where no road exists (i.e. drive carefully on a relatively flat patch of dirt around a tree that has fallen on the road) because we have an idea of the conditions necessary for driving a car somewhere. An idea of a road encompasses all possible versions, real and imaginary of what a road can be. An idea observes physical reality and computing IS physical reality. Another way to say this is that computing is always the observation, never the observer. An idea is not something physical, and a computer program is and therein lies the problem. We don’t know and don’t have any idea how to know, how to get from something physical to something non-physical. That is the hard problem of consciousness. Clearly we have brains, which are physical which are somehow necessary for consciousness. So there is definitely a relationship between consciousness and the physical world. That is not in doubt. The problem is that we have no idea what that relationship is and until we understand it, true AI will remain a distant dream. We may have to completely rethink our beliefs on what consciousness is and how it originates. (That discussion is beyond the scope of this article.) An idea is a product of consciousness, which is not material and cannot be duplicated by any physical process we know of. The idea of a road is not a representation of a road. Nor is it a specification or a diagram although it can incorporate these things. The idea of a road can include every real and imaginary road, as well as any type of representation of a road in any medium in which it is recognizable, even barely, as a road. What’s important here is that the idea of a road can take an infinite number of variables into account because an idea transcends the physical reality that it observes. Any computer, no matter how powerful, will never be able to do this. It cannot transcend it’s own physical reality. You cannot compute your way to the creation of an idea. All you can do is define and refine an idea that you already have. And to define an idea is to eventually fall into the trap of infinite variables. (You can never fully define an idea because they are an infinite number of definitions.) Increasing your computing power, memory and storage does not solve the problem of having to define everything. This is a crucial limitation of AI because it is impossible to define everything. This is why the formation of ideas is central to real intelligence. Ideas and concepts allow us to process otherwise unimaginable amounts of information by relying on a core of intangible concepts that encompass nearly everything we can hope to encounter rather than having to literally translate every single bit of input our minds receive. That’s why we can look at a road and identify it as a road with just a glance without ever having to really think about it. Computers, of course, do not operate anything like this. We function with intangibles and a computer functions with tangibles. That is a huge difference. So if you were worried that computers were going to take over the world, rest easy. Actual thinking is going to be the exclusive domain of living creatures for the foreseeable future
Human experienced: In order to learn a new language with fluid efficiency, you have to spend time conversing with others who are familiar with the slang, culture, social context of the terminology, and other things that can’t all be learned from a piece of dictation software. A machine faces even greater challenges in this scenario due to its lack of cultural experiences, hardships, and everyday human interactions. An independent operator: The thought of robots rebelling against mankind makes for an intriguing plot, but due to the reliance on human assistance, it may never be possible. Even the most skilled of smart machines still depend on man to write their automation capabilities, perform repairs, and handle general maintenance. And let’s not forget those crucial OS updates. Without us, the most advanced AI machines would be non-functional sooner or later. Social savvy: Everyday, computers talk to one another to connect our systems to the Internet and power the network operations we thrive on. Like all aspects of technology, machine-to-machine interactions can and will evolve, but there is a limit to their communication capabilities. The inability to proactively socialize means a super intelligent computer can’t coordinate sadistic schemes from scratch with like systems, or even sway disloyal people into betraying their own kind – though that might not take much convincing.
Except it's a little hard to find any details of what exactly that existential threat is perceived to be. Hawking has suggested that it might be the capacity of a strong AI to 'evolve' much, much faster than biological systems - ultimately gobbling up resources without a care for the likes of us. I think this is a fair conjecture. AI's threat is not that it will be a sadistic megalomaniac (unless we deliberately, or carelessly make it that way) but that it will follow its own evolutionary imperative. It's tempting to suggest that a safeguard would be to build empathy into an AI. But I think that fails in two ways. First, most humans have the capacity for empathy, yet we continue to be nasty, brutish, and brutal to ourselves and to pretty much every other living thing on the planet. The second failure point is that it's not clear to me that true, strong, AI is something that we can engineer in a pure step-by-step way, we may need to allow it to come into being on its own. What does that mean? Current efforts in areas such as computational 'deep-learning' involve algorithms constructing their own probabilistic landscapes for sifting through vast amounts of information. The software is not necessarily hard-wired to 'know' the rules ahead of time, but rather to find the rules or to be amenable to being guided to the rules - for example in natural language processing. It's incredible stuff, but it's not clear that it is a path to AI that has equivalency to the way humans, or any sentient organisms, think. This has been hotly debated by the likes of Noam Chomsky (on the side of skepticism) and Peter Norvig (on the side of enthusiasm). At a deep level it is a face-off between science focused on underlying simplicity, and science that says nature may not swing that way at all. An alternative route to AI is one that I'll propose here (and it's not original). Perhaps the general conditions can be created from which intelligence can emerge. On the face of it this seems fairly ludicrous, like throwing a bunch of spare parts in a box and hoping for a new bicycle to appear. It's certainly not a way to treat AI as a scientific study. But if intelligence is the emergent - evolutionary - property of the right sort of very, very complex systems, could it happen? Perhaps. One engineering challenge is that it may take a system of the complexity of a human brain to sustain intelligence, but of course our brains co-evolved with our intelligence. So it's a bit silly to imagine that you could sit down and design the perfect circumstances for a new type of intelligence to appear, because we don't know exactly what those circumstances should be.
The head of artificial intelligence at Google’s DeepMind thinks we’re all being silly to worry about machines rising up to crush humanity. (Or maybe he’s just a superintelligent machine sent from the future to lull us into a false sense of security.) Mustafa Suleyman, co-founder of DeepMind, which Google bought last year, told a London audience Friday that critics and worrywarts have it all wrong. “Whether it’s Terminator coming to blow us up or mad scientists looking to create quite perverted women robots, this narrative has somehow managed to dominate the entire landscape, which we find really quite remarkable,” Suleyman said, according to a Wall Street Journal report. It’s not just conspiracy-theory crackpots and “Terminator” fans who are wary — Tesla’s Elon Musk has called artificial intelligence “potentially more dangerous than nukes,” and Stephen Hawking warned A.I. could “spell the end of the human race.” But Suleyman says we’re looking at it from the wrong perspective. “The way we think about A.I. is that it’s going to be a hugely powerful tool that we control and that we direct, whose capabilities we limit, just as you do with any other tool that we have in the world around us, whether they’re washing machines or tractors. We’re building them to empower humanity and not to destroy us.”
Biogen, one of the global leaders in biotechnology with headquarters in Massachusetts, will open a new plant in the northern part of Switzerland. Biogen specializes in the research, development, and delivery of therapies for the treatment of neurodegenerative, hematologic, and autoimmune diseases to patients worldwide. It is today the third largest biotech company in the world, employing 7,500 people in 30 countries. The organization was originally founded in Geneva in 1978 by a group of prominent biologists, before moving its global headquarters to the US, still keeping a presence in Switzerland. Biogen decided to strengthen its ties with the country and will soon open a new production site in Luterbach, Solothurn. According to the canton’s press release, 1 billion Swiss francs will be invested in the facilities and by 2019, about 400 jobs should have been created. This is the most important settlement in the canton’s history.
Any form of human genetic engineering should only be considered for use in cases such as the treatment of patients who have life-threatening medical conditions. Gene therapy trials in humans have been performed for decades, and some have not been without unintended adverse effects. There are patients who later developed cancers and there were those who died during their therapy studies. Currently, gene therapy is being performed in clinical studies because even with these reported complications and/or deaths, the risks of the engineering techniques still outweigh the overwhelming damage of the disease it is attempting to cure. On the contrary, genetic enhancement that would alter a human being to ensure that highly desirable traits are passed on to offspring should be prohibited, because apart from the risks inherent to genetic engineering, there are ethical issues and societal impacts to consider. Advancements in biotechnology are inevitable, and it is human nature to explore them to see how they may sustain and improve our lives. However, just because they are available does not mean we should use them; the promotion of our health should be of utmost importance.
The opportunity in biopharmaceuticals is big and growing too rapidly to ignore. Today, biopharmaceuticals generate global revenues of $163 billion, making up about 20 percent of the pharma market. It’s by far the fastest-growing part of the industry: biopharma’s current annual growth rate of more than 8 percent is double that of conventional pharma, and growth is expected to continue at that rate for the foreseeable future. The efficacy and safety of biopharmaceutical products, combined with their ability to address previously untreatable conditions, allows pharma companies to command high prices for innovative drugs. Strong demand has driven significant profits, despite the high cost of goods sold. Biopharmaceuticals have set new standards for blockbuster drugs as well. Blockbusters are traditionally defined as drugs that have $1 billion or more in annual sales; the top 15 biopharma products each enjoy annual revenue of more than $2 billion, with some, such as the antiinflammatory drug Humira, generating sales of more than $10 billion a year. For many players, the biggest challenge has been simply making enough product to sell. It’s no surprise that major pharmaceutical companies around the world are increasingly shifting their R&D and sourcing focus to large-molecule products (Exhibit 2). Investing in biotech R&D has yielded better returns than the pharma-industry average. The current biologics-development pipeline supports an outlook of continued healthy growth. The number of biotech patents applied for every year has been growing at 25 percent annually since 1995. There are currently more than 1,500 biomolecules undergoing clinical trials, and the success rate for biologics has so far been over twice that of small-molecule products, with 13 percent of biopharma products that enter the Phase I trial stage going on to launch. The success of the clinical pipeline will lead to an unprecedented number of new molecule launches, rising from a handful a few years ago to 10 to 15 annually, as biopharma products make up an increasing share of new approvals from the US Food and Drug Administration in the future. A further steep increase is to be expected as multiple players begin to receive approval for the production of biosimilars after 2015. If anything, the emerging long-term picture is even more exciting, with disruptive innovations such as immunotherapies, antibody drug conjugates, and gene and cell therapies all making progress toward commercial launch in the next few years. Biopharma looks poised to transform the industry once more, as increasing understanding of the interaction between drugs and the genetic makeup of patients helps to improve the targeting of therapies. Combined with robust, low-cost genetic profiling, this knowledge will improve treatment outcomes and serve to accelerate and improve the outcomes of clinical trials, helping to reduce the cost of drug development.
For Better or Worse GMO Is Inevitable and Here to Stay Genetic engineering is already widespread. Today, despite the Cheerios announcement, around 70 percent of all the processed food that you buy in America contains genetically engineered ingredients, including soft drinks, ketchup, potato chips, cookies, ice cream, and corn flakes. Crops in the US that are now largely GMO include alfalfa, canola, corn, cotton, papaya, soy, sugar beets, and zucchini and yellow summer squash. General Mills merely took advantage of a low cost, low risk option to see if labeling Cheerios non-GMO gave it a meaningful marketing edge over the competition. They most decidedly did not extend that decision to more costly changes such as would be required to make Kix non-GMO. Unlike Cheerios, the first four ingredients in Kix are all GMO: whole grain corn, corn meal, beet sugar, and corn bran. When General Mills announces that Kix is going non-GMO that will actually mean something. But I wouldn't hold my breath. Ultimately, GMO will keep moving forward because it often fills a particular need (resistance to pests, drought, freezing, etc.) or is economically preferable. Look at the European Union (EU), which regulates food stuffs for all its members. The EU has the toughest standards in the world for getting GMO products approved. Nevertheless, as of 2012, they had already approved 48 GMOs, although mostly for animal feed. More to the point, they have indeed approved several GMO food crops for cultivation in the EU including a Bt expressing corn that provides resistance to the European corn borer (fills a particular need) and something called Amflora potato, which was developed by the German company, BASF, that has a higher than normal yield of potato starch (economically preferable). So much for the EU's total resistance to GMO. The other thing to keep in mind, is that genetic modification is now so easy and inexpensive to accomplish, that it is impossible to stop. Stop it in Europe and the US, and it will continue in Africa and Asia. Keep in mind that whereas DNA sequencing once cost millions and millions of dollars and took many months of super computer time, it can now be done for $99--and still turn a profit.3 Trying to stop GMO is a bit like ordering the tide not to come in. Just ask King Canute how well that works.4 The bottom line is that given the inevitability of its coming, we need to figure out better ways to regulate it, label it, and prevent dangerous iterations of it from destroying the environment.
"There is a lot of research on transgenic wheat underway, (and) I don't think there's any doubt it will happen," Jacobson said. "It's just a question of when it's going to happen." Doug Jones, executive director of Growers for Biotechnology, agrees with Jacobson's timeline. "I think it's inevitable it will happen," he said. Monsanto began researching transgenic wheat during the late 1990s but stopped in 2005, primarily because of concern by U.S. growers that the Canadian Wheat Board wouldn't support getting GMO wheat approved in that country, according to Steve Mercer, director of communications for U.S. Wheat Associates. The U.S. industry was fighting with Canada for overseas markets at the time and "we felt confident they would try to use it as a competitive advantage," Mercer said. Monsanto, whose research was primarily aimed at developing spring wheat varieties with a Roundup Ready trait, withdrew its application for deregulation in 2005. The U.S. industry supports development of GMO wheat varieties as long as the right approvals can be obtained in the U.S., other major wheat producing countries and key overseas markets, Mercer said. GMO wheat research picked up again after the U.S., Canadian and Australian industries signed a joint statement in 2009 supporting development of genetically modified traits in wheat and moving forward with getting GMO wheat varieties deregulated in those countries. Hundreds of millions of dollars are being spent on GMO wheat research now, and many industry leaders feel its development and commercial introduction are inevitable.
“If you can start modifying your body not to heal something or to fix a disability but in order to enhance your body, there won’t be any kind of health insurance that’s going to pay,” said Bertolt Meyer, a social psychologist at the Chemnitz University of Technology. Meyer was born an amputee and wears an i-limb on his left arm. Meyer said if we reach a future where technology is developed not to match the capabilities of a healthy human body, but to enhance it, suddenly a new market will emerge. These will be technologies that everyone might want, even those with otherwise healthy bodies. If most people start making modifications, it will change what we think of as an average human body, Meyer said. “If a lot of people are able to afford a device, a technology, or a surgery that enhances their capabilities, the average capability in society shifts upward,” Meyer told me. “That means that something that is normal today will be seen as a shortcoming in the future because a lot of people are ‘better than normal’ in the future.” "This stuff is going to happen. It’s just a question of when.” As an example, Meyer pointed to modern day laser e​ye surgeries that can enable people to gain 20/10 vision (a person with 20/10 vision can see at 20 feet what a “normal” person can see at 10 feet). If such a procedure became affordable enough that the average person has access to the surgery, perfect 20/20 vision could eventually be considered below-average eyesight. What does that mean for those who have 20/20 vision (or worse) and can’t afford surgery? How might the job market change as the average worker is able to do more? “We’re not talking about a faster car. We’re talking about technology that will be able to enhance human capabilities,” Meyer said. But technology has exacerbated these kinds of economic gulfs in the past, according to Thad Starner, a computing professor at the Georgia Institute of Technology, and society has managed to adapt. A few centuries ago, books and manuscripts were only accessible to the wealthiest sliver of the population. Now, most of the world has access to books and written information, often inexpensively or for free through libraries or the internet. Starner said while it took a long time to close the gap between those who had access to books and those who did not, that process is happening more quickly with modern technology.
But he wasn’t as certain as Starner was that this kind of technology is inevitable, suggesting people might balk at the idea of chopping off an otherwise healthy arm to replace it with a bionic limb. Just like the early smartphone, if people aren’t willing to adopt the new technology, it won’t prevail. And as Meyer pointed out, it’s not so hard to imagine the general population feeling hesitant about a transhumanist present. “It’s interesting: whenever you have science fiction that depicts a future where you have people able to enhance the functionality of their bodies with technology, it’s always dystopian. It’s never a good future. It’s always a bad future,” Meyer said. “I wonder why that is.”
Downward cost pressure will intensify as healthcare systems struggle to balance rising demand with flat or declining budgets. In this environment, payors may find it difficult to justify the annual treatment costs of $50,000 to $100,000 that some biopharma products currently demand. It is hard to imagine that these price premiums will be sustainable for any but the most innovative drugs. Furthermore, governments in emerging markets understand the critical role that biopharma will play in boosting healthcare outcomes, and they are aggressively supporting alternative ways to fulfill demand for these products. The result of these pressures will be the inevitable development of the biosimilars industry. The availability of biosimilar versions of human-growth hormones and interferons has already opened access to these products to a far larger number of patients. As patent protection on more complex biopharmaceuticals expires, biosimilars will surely follow the same path. Early regulatory and customer concern is already being overcome. In June 2013, for example, the European Union approved Remsima, Celltrion’s biosimilar version of the monoclonal antibody Remicade. In emerging markets, where consumers are able to access products only if they are available at considerably lower prices, enthusiasm for biosimilars is likely to be even stronger. The biosimilars industry has the potential to change the commercial landscape as profoundly as generics players have done in conventional pharma. Pressure from biosimilars will force the innovators to accelerate the search for better products and will increase pressure on the industry as a whole to reduce its cost of goods sold. Complexity of biopharma supply chain and operations As the number of products rises and new process technologies such as continuous manufacturing are introduced, the complexity of biopharma operations and the biopharma supply chain will increase. Evidence indicates that current production programs are already stretching the industry, with several players failing to deliver to the market. This challenge will only increase as sites move from the current “one line, one product” setup toward nimble and flexible multiple-product operations and are required to manage both current and future technologies under one roof. The high premium on biopharmaceutical products and the relatively smaller share of revenues they have historically accounted for in big pharmaceutical companies have led to industry-wide challenges in the supply chain. Complexity, cost, and service levels are far from small-molecule best practices, even considering the additional complexity of cold-chain requirements. New manufacturing technology platforms The new classes of molecules discussed above, from drug conjugates to the cell and gene therapies arriving in the next five years, will each require its own novel manufacturing, supply, and quality-assurance approaches. Today, many companies that are insourcing these products in the late clinical or early commercialization phase are struggling to set up the novel technologies and processes required to produce them. Making the right decision about how to set up operations for an autologous cell therapy is not an obvious exercise, and there will naturally be many suboptimal solutions before sufficient experience is built. Quality compliance and regulatory scrutiny Quality functions are struggling to keep up with the rising demands of regulators, primarily the US Food and Drug Administration. The industry has received an unprecedented number of warning letters and remediation programs in the last five years, and scrutiny is unlikely to decrease. Furthermore, the increasing relevance of global markets (beyond the United States, European Union, and Japan) is adding the complexity of multiple quality standards and regulatory regimes. Compliance, robustness of processes, and efficiency will need to be squared in one equation.
Yet there are operational and technological challenges. Reproducing large molecules reliably at an industrial scale requires manufacturing capabilities of a previously unknown sophistication. Consider this: a molecule of aspirin consists of 21 atoms. A biopharmaceutical molecule might contain anything from 2,000 to 25,000 atoms (Exhibit 1). The “machines” that produce recombinant therapeutics are genetically modified living cells that must be frozen for storage, thawed without damage, and made to thrive in the unusual environment of a reaction vessel. The molecules must then be separated from the cells that made them and the media in which they were produced, all without destroying their complex, fragile structures. This sophistication comes at great cost. Large-scale biotech-manufacturing facilities require $200 million to $500 million or more to build, compared with similar-scale small-molecule facilities that may cost just $30 million to $100 million, and they can take four to five years to build. These facilities are costly to run, too, with long process durations, low yields, expensive raw materials, and, not least, the need for a team of highly skilled experts to operate them. There are myriad reasons the rapid growth and increasing importance of the industry is producing new challenges and opportunities. To keep pace, biopharma players must revisit and fundamentally reassess many of the strategies, technologies, and operational approaches they currently use.
Mulvenon later said he believes trust will be restored when encryption eventually becomes standard for the majority of Internet users.
Edward Snowden has unleashed a torrent of activity in the name of data security and privacy protection. Some of that activity has resulted in the creation of jobs, especially in the field of encryption technology (the better to foil the NSA, the theory goes) and stimulation of local economies through the construction of local data centers in Europe. Alas, Virginia, there is no magic bullet for privacy in housing data within one country because data, it has been said, wants to be free. To mix metaphors, it will seek its own level. To put it bluntly, data localization, as housing data within one’s own country is called, is an expensive fantasy that won’t move the privacy ball very far.
The Internet business model for most companies is monitoring and capitalizing on consumer behavior. Amazon and other companies keep track of consumer buying habits. Google and other companies keep track of consumer search and browsing habits. Facebook, LinkedIn LNKD -2.73%, Twitter TWTR -2.19% and other companies keep track of networks or contacts. Many companies keep track of electronic communications. Few if any of these companies keeps track of “call detail records” or even narrowly defined “tangible things.” If they have such records, they are hardly of any value.
However, the current system of so-called "Intellectual Property Rights" tries to enforce artificial barriers upon the free flow and use of information, thus creating scarcity where it is most damaging to all of humanity and where a rich bounty of wealth could exist instead. These barriers can only be upheld by a rigorous legal system, under application of draconian enforcement measures. We all know of the difficulty of preventing the free flow of information, and we all have heard the cries for help from mighty publishing empires, alleging that "pirates" are supposedly stealing large chunks of their "rightfully deserved" revenues. The difficulty of enforcing these "rights" shows how unnatural and artificial they are.
Branson says that companies like Tesla, which make electric cars, are changing the world for good, but they can't do it alone. "As it stands, it is impossible for Tesla to build electric cars fast enough to make a major positive impact upon carbon emissions," he notes. So instead of monopolizing the market and keeping innovation at bay with patents, Musk is encouraging other innovators to utilize Tesla's technology and effectively join a movement towards more sustainable transportation.
One of the difficulties encountered has been to find a way to scale up wondrous single developments to useful macro size. Nanotech just doesn't scale well. making the scaling up of breakthroughs in nanoscience to macro (usable) sizes almost as difficult and expensive as the cost of the original nanoscience or nanotech development breakthroughs. Nano-pros have failed to find ways to reproduce nanoscience breakthroughs reliably with repeated high technological performance and continuous integrity to macro size manufacturing specs. Truthfully, there hasn't been enough investment money devoted to this part of the nanotech development story. Moreover, it's not sufficient just to scale the Nano part of a development. Economically, the entire system containing the nanotech breakthrough has to be scaled… and technically, systems scaling is very difficult. It's been an expensive and hard lesson to learn. The mass of much lionized nanotubes, both single and multiple wall, form in a spaghetti-like mixed breed mess. This "mess' is useless product wise. The nanotubes have to be separated by type, separated from each other, and then oriented for use in a higher-level system. Not only is this process difficult to accomplish reliably but it also is expensive changing some of the economic promise of nanotube applications. Nanotubes are projected as the ‘next connectors' in semiconductors. IBM literally has to cut grooves in substrates to orient their nanotube connectors properly for testing and for prototype use. It admits the grooves are not a solution and are searching for other ways to build nanotube-connected chips for use in its semiconductor applications.
While this has very real applications, as Dr Fay went on to describe, he made it very clear in his talk that many of the ideas that futurists have about nanotechnology are simply unfeasible. For example, building a space elevator out of carbon nanotubes, while it works on paper, it doesn’t work in practice; a functional space elevator would need to be 35,800 km high and made from perfect carbon nanotubes, whereas lab efforts have so far produced about 20 cm worth of imperfect carbon nanotubes. And the idea of microscopic robots administered in the form of grey goo that can either help or harm us remains a subject purely of science fiction, not science fact. But it wasn’t all crushing the fanciful imaginings of science fiction authors and fans. Dr. Fay did also describe some of the very real applications of nanotechnology in the real world. These include potential medicinal uses, such as highlighting tumours, as cancerous cells are less able to process and remove nano-particles than healthy cells, which would make it easier to locate tumours and target treatment and surgery more accurately. Other uses including self-cleaning materials, such as windows that require only sunlight and rain to do the job, as well as fabrics that are waterproof but can still breathe, allowing people (such as cyclists) to stay dry, but not to feel as if they’re wearing a plastic bag. There are also potential agricultural applications, such as tiny sensors that can be applied to crops to allow farmers to know when they need to be watered, ensuring that crops aren’t overwatered and reducing potential waste. It may not be as exciting as a missile-delivered green goo that eats the legs out from under the Eiffel Tower, causing it to the collapse into the River Seine, or as terrifying as microscopic robots that transform human beings into mindless cyborgs, but the uses are very real and beneficial to humanity. Perhaps the most important take-home message of Dr. Fay’s whole talk was the role of engineers in making the transition between a scientific discover in the lab and its application in the real world. The transistor revolutionised modern technology, but it didn’t give us the internet and smart phones overnight. Decades of hard work by scientists and engineers brought us the innovations we have today and it will be the same with nanotechnology, once we have climbed back out of the trough of disillusionment. The talk was engaging and entertaining, and covered the topic so thoroughly that we struggled to think of any questions for the Q&A. Dr. Fay’s use of a slide show was also spot-on, providing visual examples of what he was talking about, helping to illustrate just what nanotechnology is. It would be safe to say that we all came away with a better understanding and appreciation of this fascinating area of modern research.
Hundreds of commercial products now rely on nanoscale materials and processes; the market share is estimated to be between $50 billion and $1 trillion. Although commercial forecasts vary, it is without doubt that nanotech is increasingly critical for national power, a premise which follows from both current and potential military applications of nanotech. The US Department of Defence identified nanotechnology as one of the six strategic research areas in the mid-1990s, and in recent years, emerging or so-called “re-emerging” powers have increased their investments. With the use of nanotechnology, Russia has already successfully developed the world’s most powerful non-nuclear bomb, with a blast radius of 300 meters and the ability to contain the equivalent of 44 tons of explosives (the US bomb is equivalent to 11 tons).
Dexler described these self-replicating nanomachines, as consumers that would feed on all organic matter. After breaking down organic matter into molecules, these consumer nanomachines would work together to create a new object or another nanomachines. This kind of technology could improve manufacturing in every field, but only in a closed environment. In Dexler’s illustration of replicating nanomachines, there is only one replicator in a jar of chemicals necessary for replication and in about 1000 seconds, the lone replicator creates an exact copy of itself. Theoretically, the replicators’ mass would be higher than the mass of the Earth in two days! This shows how fast replication can get out of hand, more or less like a bacterial disease. Luckily, the nanomachines would probably never reach such a huge scale, because there are many limitations, such as reality! First, the nanomachines are powered by some power source. If the nanomachines outgrow the power source, replication will be stopped. Additionally, if replication keeps occurring, then a majority of nanomachines would have nothing to consume. Nanotech medicine Grey Goo: Death by Nanotech You might not have noticed, but nowadays nanotechnology is everywhere! Nanobots are used in the medical field to deliver medicine onto cancerous areas, perform surgery, and monitor health. Scientists hope to develop nanobots that could monitor and manage somebody’s health on a cellular level. Because of Dexler’s grey goo theory, researchers are taking note it and avoiding the creation of self-replicating nanobots. However, some researchers believe that replication of nanobots, if controlled, is completely safe.
There is, clearly, no shortage of technology at the nano-scale. We've self-assembling structures, folding shapes that can collect and release loads, walking contraptions, molecular motors, vehicles that make use of them, and, perhaps, even the potential to fuel them. You can also add to that list a smattering of smart extras, too—like single-molecule LEDs and simple DNA-based computers—that could, one day, make them more than just simple mechanical systems. So is there any hope of Drexler's nanoscale production line? "We've already shown that," explains Seeman, as if it were never really in doubt. A few years ago, Seeman's lab showed off what was the first molecular production line. Four DNA nanorobots walked along a specially-prepared surface, picking up gold particles and interacting with each as they moved to build themselves into one of eight different end products. Admittedly the finally result was one of eight different tangles of DNA and gold particles, but as a proof of concept it was irresistible. Progress hasn't halted since. Other assembly lines have been created which, instead of building a tangle of DNA, actually piece together smaller molecules to form larger, more complex structures that can then be used for an entirely new applications. Those molecular motors have been put to work, too, using their rotational abilities to control chiral catalysts—molecules that themselves speed up other reactions, depending on the orientations of the atoms within the more complex structure. Molecular machines are being used in labs the world over to tweak and assemble other molecules, creating larger assemblies that can be used for another purpose. Fiction to fact In other words: we're getting there. But instead of the primordial stew of nanobots producing grey goo, the reality of the molecular building site is a more nuanced, structured and modest one. Perhaps its no surprise that Drexler himself has tweaked his own hypothesis about the future on nanotechnology. In his 2013 book Radical Abundance, he writes about "microblocks." These, he suggests, are a kind of Russian Doll assembly process, where a cascade of thousands of tiny robotic cells each builds components at the molecular level, feeding those components to increasingly larger robots until a full-size product is created. You can imagine it as a series of ever larger 3D printers, the first working at the molecular level, each creating components to pass up to the chain, to create larger and larger structures. Of course, with that kind of increasingly complexity comes greater challenge—but given the distance we've come, such obstacles shouldn't be seen as too daunting. "Life itself is not possible without the multitude of molecular machines inside our bodies that work in turbulent environments and with very little power but accomplish very complex tasks from virus transport to muscle flexing," explains Professor Charles Sykes from the Department of Chemistry at Tufts University. "Many wonderful things are possible as nature has already proven." Indeed, as academics see it, there's only a single real barrier. "The key constraint is the usual one," muses Seeman. "Money." Really, then, the revelatory ambitions of the eighties assemblers have simply mellowed. Rather than scuttling around making—or destroying—at will, the molecular machines of the near future will be ordered, constrained and working for us rather than in competition. Rather less alarmist, and rather more useful. And that, it seems, is what happens when science fiction becomes more like science fact.
When an entire military infrastructure, from doctrine, to training, to equipping a force is dependent upon the advantage that NCW provides, disrupting NCW can cause the entire house of cards to collapse. One of the most obvious examples the military has sought to prepare for is the disruption of the Global Positioning System (GPS) signal, upon which virtually all “smart weapons” depend for targeting guidance. If you create an entire military command, control, communications and information system dependent upon NCW principles like everywhere access, trusted communication, and high-speed data, you give an enemy a detailed map of how to defeat you. As a result, systems have to be not only robust, but your doctrine and training has to be tolerant of working without NCW available, and that least-common-denominator or worstcase-scenario undermines all the effort and work spent on an NCW system. While cliché, the old saw “The enemy gets a vote” is all too true, and depending entirely and inflexibly upon a single concept of any sort is a sure step on the road to defeat.
One of the major issues identified with NCW is a heavy reliance on technology, particularly infrastructure. There are various reasons why reliance on infrastructure brings with it significant risk. It can become the ‘primary centre of gravity for opponents to exploit’.[19] This is particularly hazardous if alternative ways of working are not available.[20] If NCW becomes so critical to warfare that forces become incapable of fighting in a non-network centric fashion, there is little doubt that any disruption to networks that they are dependent on could be catastrophic and potentially crippling for a military. Nor is there any doubt that a capable enemy would attempt to exploit this weakness by disrupting networks. A case in point would be the proliferation of GPS jammers. The Commander of United States Air Force Space Command has identified that US forces have ‘a very heavy reliance on space and we consider GPS foundational in military operations’.[21] Indeed, GPS has been described as ‘the core asset required for NCW to work’.[22] However, in recent years GPS jammers which can block GPS signals have become more widely available than ever before. If a jammer is used by an enemy it has the potential to ‘eliminate GPS navigation and precision guidance capabilities within an extensive area of operations’.[23] Quite clearly, a loss of GPS capability would have calamitous effects on the US’ war fighting capability, as would be the case with the majority of the world’s armed forces that utilise the GPS system. This would be mostly damaging for those forces relying on network-centric navigational systems, to which GPS is a major component.
Ultimately, it is important to recognize that possibilities exist for increasing the efficiency of existing systems and processes without the massive investment in large, complex, networked systems. Considering the depth of required technology distribution, security/encryption issues, bandwidth requirements, and Moore’s Law, etc., the more reliant the military becomes on NCW, the more susceptible it becomes to both technical factors in addition to the real threat of an information technology sophisticated enemy. All these factors are exacerbated by the types of environments the United States and her allies typically engage in military operations. Bandwidth, power, access, and nodes are scarce in harsh, isolated environs. The sensitivity of modern hightechnology systems to heat, dust and moisture, as well as the large standing army of personnel to manage and support such systems in the field create a significant support tail.
Physical security of NCW system nodes are an especially troubling vulnerability. Satellites are an obvious example, and have become increasingly COTS-like and less hardened than the military systems of the recent past or Cold War era. As a result, they are highly vulnerable to kinetic attack, electronic interference, or other means of rendering them ineffective. Natural forces, like sunspots, can also add uncertainly to operations. Additionally, defending network relays is difficult with the vulnerability of ground nodes, many of which are provided by commercial vendors outside of secure locations. Another major security concern is data integrity as meaningful information requires continuously maintaining information trust, structure, and credibility. Finally, pure information volume strains fusion and control mechanisms, and either human or machine issues could exacerbate a problem and lead to mission failure.
Resource expenditures will not only be felt in terms of finances. Research and development can take years. That amounts to an uncertain opportunity cost equation as valuable time and attention is spent on NCW and not on other concerns, missions, or allied interoperability. Additionally, the risk of obsolescence during such processes is almost guaranteed as so many NCW-like systems are built on a foundation of Commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) equipment and software that advances based on commercial demand versus military need. The complexity inherent in developing systems with highly fused data requirements can take more than five years to reach the field; while computer hardware typically refreshes every 18 months and commercial operating systems on a 12-14 month cycle, driving either obsolescence or increased cost as the government has to pay suppliers for diminishing manufacturing sources or delayed software end-of-life agreements.
Beyond resource consumption, security is almost impossibly difficult. An integrated network-centric configuration is only as secure as the most vulnerable platforms, operating systems, interfaces, and users. As the Bradley Manning and Edward Snowden cases have recently made plain, insider attacks are a significant risk with highly networked systems full of sensitive data. A single individual with elevated access and an axe to grind can completely undermine the entire network, all the information it contains, and the security/capability it projects.
A primary disadvantage of NCW is that it is highly resource intensive. Procuring necessary hardware and software is not only expensive, but is an ongoing cost with no ceiling, as both hardware and software systems reach obsolescence at ever increasing speed. Maintaining said wares, as technology evolves, will be even more costly. The overdependence by DoD on commercial information technology providers with conflicting goals (maximizing shareholder value vs. providing national security) has the potential of compromising national security by constructing a system on a platform over which you have no direct control. While this risk can be mitigated somewhat by organic development on open-source platforms, there is a very limited existing capacity to do this at the present time, not to mention, no known inclination to do so.
The primary reason the American military remains stuck in the Second Generation, and intentionally ignores the Fourth, is money. At senior levels all that matters is the budget. So long as the budget stays high (and preferably grows) war does not matter. Losing wars, repeatedly, does not matter. As Army Lt. Col. Paul Yingling wrote, “{A} private who loses a rifle suffers far greater consequences than a general who loses a war.” That is a statement of literal fact, as the repeated promotions of senior field commanders who failed to higher positions, including service chief, demonstrates. All that matters is protecting the money flow. That is institutional corruption, not merely monetary corruption but corruption of institutional purpose, on a grand scale. It presages an equally grand collapse, military, financial or both (I await both). It may take the American state with it, ushering in widespread 4GW on American soil. The only way to revive the U.S. military as an institution with both interest in and competence at warfare is a massive purge of the senior leadership, uniformed and civilian, coupled with major budget cuts, larger reductions in the size of the officer corps and elimination of most contractors. The chances of that happening are the same as the chances of any other major reform program coming out of Washington. If you think those changes are more than zero, I own a great bridge up in Brooklyn I’d like to sell you.
But in fact, the half-dozen security experts interviewed for this article agreed it’s virtually impossible for an online-only attack to cause a widespread or prolonged outage of the North American power grid. Even laying the groundwork for such a cyber operation could qualify as an act of war against the U.S. — a line that few nation-state-backed hacker crews would wish to cross. None denied that determined hackers could penetrate the networks of bulk power providers. But there’s a huge gap between that and causing a civilization-ending sustained outage of the grid. Electrical-grid hacking scenarios mostly overlook the engineering expertise necessary to intentionally cause harm to the grid, say experts knowledgeable about the power generators and high voltage transmission entities that constitute the backbone of the grid — what’s called the bulk power system. There’s also the enormity of the grid and diversity of its equipment to consider. “The grid is designed to lose utilities all the time,” said Patrick Miller, founder and director of the Energy Sector Security Consortium. “I’m not trying to trivialize the situation, but you’re not really able to cause this nationwide cascading failure for any extended duration of time,” he added. “It’s just not possible.” ICS security in a nutshell Controlling the boilers, fans, valves and switches and other mechanical devices that turn raw inputs and high-voltage transmission into flip-of-a-switch electricity is a class of computers known as industrial control systems. Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition Systems, or SCADA, is a type of ICS. ICSs aren’t general purpose computers like desktops. At the level of direct control over electromechanical processes — via a device often classified as a Programmable Logic Controller — programming is mainly done in specialized languages on obscure operating systems. Even just accessing a PLC requires particular software. Hiding malware in field devices is difficult to impossible. Many of the devices “aren’t running multi-thread, multi-tasking operations like our laptops,” noted Chris Blask, chair of the Industrial Control System Information Sharing and Analysis Center. And penetration is just a starting point. “Just hacking into the system, and even taking complete control of a computer or crashing a bunch of computers, won’t necessarily bring down the bulk electric system,” said Dale Peterson, founder of Digital Bond, an industrial control system cybersecurity consultancy. For example, hackers could cause a SCADA system to crash, causing grid operators to lose system visibility — decidedly not a good thing. But the grid doesn’t need the SCADA system to continue operating. “There has to be an understanding that simply taking out the cyber assets doesn’t cause a blackout,” Peterson said.
As the nation transitions to the smart grid, the electrical power industry will likely find the most efficient security solutions to be those that supplement already existing standards, controls, and best practices. Following are different categories of technologies that can be modified to better mitigate the risks associated with the smart grid: (NIST, 2010a):
Once every four days in the United States, a physical or cyber-attack on the nation's electrical grid causes an electrical emergency or disturbance – highlighting the growing threat of a constant siege on the country's energy sources. Since 2011 there have been more than 350 such incidents reported to the U.S. Department of Energy. Even though most are short-lived incidents, they are indicative of serious security vulnerabilities that analysts and officials fear could be exploited by bad actors to create a cascading blackout that could leave millions of people without power for days. Problems range from lack of security cameras and opaque fencing around transformers and other important equipment and facilities to inadequate cyber-security measures within the computer networks used to control the grid. Southwest Ohio is no exception. Area energy providers and utility regulators say they have taken action to make sure any such attacks remain minor issues. Over the past four years, Southwest Ohio has dealt with six physical attacks on the electrical grid. In data compiled by USA TODAY, 362 incidents were reported between January 2011 and December 2014 to the U.S. Department of Energy; in Southwest Ohio, Duke Energy reported five of these incidents.
The electric grid is a complex system of power plants, substations, and transmission and distribution lines. Protecting it is no easy task, requiring constant vigilance from industry as well as government. A sustained, interactive partnership between the federal government and the electric utility sector now exists to protect the grid. That partnership has worked well, but it can be strengthened, both through new legislation and more clearly defining roles and responsibilities. One area where the partnership has demonstrated effectiveness is in reliability. Since 2005, the electric utility industry has operated under a mandatory federal reliability regime — the only critical infrastructure sector to do so. The industry works with the North American Electric Reliability Corp. (NERC), a nonprofit entity chosen by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) to help send electrons where they need to go. NERC develops mandatory reliability standards, which must be approved by FERC before being implemented. NERC enforces those standards through regular monitoring and compliance audits, and fines can reach up to $1 million per day. But fines after the fact are not enough. The government and utility industry must keep several steps ahead of attackers. Entities such as the Electricity Sub-Sector Coordinating Council, composed of senior industry and government security officials, and the Electricity Sector Information Sharing and Analysis Center, help facilitate information sharing about threats and how to respond. But when it comes to cyber threats to the grid, more can be done to enhance information flow between industry and federal agencies — in both directions — about vulnerabilities and attacks.
The specter of a large-scale, destructive attack on the U.S. power grid is at the center of much strategic thinking about cybersecurity. For years, Americans have been warned by a bevy of would-be Cassandras in Congress, the administration and the press that hackers are poised to shut it down.
Another perennial concern is that the water contaminated with radioactive particles still leaking from the stricken nuclear power plant site is poisoning Pacific Ocean fish and other seafood. There is no doubt that ingesting radionuclides is one of the worst forms of radiation exposure, because it continues for a long period of time. But, with the exception of bottom-feeding fish and sessile (immobile) filter feeders caught in the immediate vicinity, any radionuclides from Fukushima have been diluted by the vastness of the Pacific to insignificant quantities. The extra radionuclides from Fukushima are simply not enough to create a dose large enough to cause any human health effects outside the immediate vicinity of the stricken nuclear power plant.
Security – terrorism, etc. Since the World Trade Centre attacks in New York in 2001 there has been increased concern about the consequences of a large aircraft being used to attack a nuclear facility with the purpose of releasing radioactive materials. Various studies have looked at similar attacks on nuclear power plants. They show that nuclear reactors would be more resistant to such attacks than virtually any other civil installations – see Appendix 3. A thorough study was undertaken by the US Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) using specialist consultants and paid for by the US Dept. of Energy. It concludes that US reactor structures "are robust and (would) protect the fuel from impacts of large commercial aircraft".
Energy analysts who support new nuclear power plants construction insist that the probability of a terrorist nuclear attack by land, sea, or air is extremely low. They reject arguments by nuclear power opponents that terrorist groups may one day attack a nuclear plant, or build an improvised nuclear bomb using materials stolen from a nuclear power plant – and that governments should, therefore, end construction of new nuclear power plants. A recent article published by The Energy Collective examines the probability and real hazard of a terrorist attack on a nuclear plant, and the hazards and probabilities of other available nuclear attack options for terrorists.
In general, a landscape approach works better if rights to land and trees are secure. This creates incentives for individual farmers, households, and communities to invest in improved land and water management and to protect trees and forests. Appropriate pricing regimes encourage rational use of scarce resources. Regulations are sometimes also needed (e.g., to control pollution run-off or avoid free grazing of animals) but these need to be backed up by appropriate incentives for private farmers to invest in “public good” activities which may benefit others in the landscape in addition to strengthening the delivery of ecosystem services (Kline et al 2009). Landscape management often also requires “upfront” investments which yield benefits in the longer run. This requires creating an enabling environment to access long term finance, or to overcome the trade-offs between short term costs and long term benefits. Governments can support provision of, and investments in, public goods such as research in improved breeds and farming systems. Communications and information infrastructure is also very helpful. If people don’t have access to information they can understand, then they don’t have an incentive to change behaviour. Improved technologies also have a role, as does taking advantage of local knowledge. Creating an environment conducive to behavioural change is also important. Decentralized decisionmaking facilitates locally adapted solutions and encourages local communities to participate. Access to information and long-term finance, as well as transparent and accountable institutions, are essential.
A University of St Andrews study has found that, despite fears of a biodiversity crisis, there has in fact not been a consistent drop in numbers of species found locally around the world. Instead, in a study of 100 communities and a total of 35,000 species that span from trees to starfish, scientists found a consistent change in which species are found in any one place. The researchers, who were surprised by the findings, say that the study should not detract from the threat many of the world’s species are under, but that policy-makers should focus on changes in biodiversity composition as well as loss. The findings, published by the leading journal Science this week, are the result of research led by Dr Maria Dornelas and Professor Anne Magurran of the Centre for Biological Diversity and Scottish Oceans Institute at the University of St Andrews. The full text of the paper is available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1248484. An international research team studied over 6 million observations in terrestrial, freshwater, and marine habitats from the poles to the equator. Instead of finding a loss in biodiversity, they discovered that the species inhabitance of different locations has been systematically changing over time. Dr Dornelas said, “Contrary to expectations, we did not observe consistent loss of species through time – indeed we found as many surveys with a systematic loss as well as gain in the number of species recorded through time. This is surprising given current concerns of a biodiversity crisis and abnormally high extinction rates.” The team studied everything from trees, birds and mammals, to fish and invertebrates. Professor Magurran commented, “We observed consistent change in species composition of communities. This surprising finding could be due largely to invasive species, which have been rapidly spreading around the globe, and the shifting ranges of species in response to climate change.”
Habitat change and habitat degradation are currently the major drivers of global biodiversity change (Figure 3). In terrestrial systems, land-use change dynamics can be broadly classified into three categories: conversion of natural habitats to human-dominated habitats, intensification of human use of human-dominated habitats, and recovery of natural vegetation and forest in areas that have been previously cleared by humans. Not all species respond equally to habitat changes (105, 106, 107): When forest is converted to agriculture and pastures, some species may increase in abundance, whereas other species, particularly habitat specialists (108, 109), can decline or even go locally extinct. Although the three types of land change dynamics occur in most world regions, the relative importance of each one has a strong latitudinal pattern (Figure 7b) (2, 110): Most conversion of natural to human-dominated habitats is occurring in tropical forests (111); agricultural intensification started in the developed regions but is rapidly expanding to the rest of the world (not represented in Figure 7b) (112); most recovery of natural and forest vegetation is occurring in temperate regions in Europe and North America (17) (Figure 7b). A net forest loss of about 42,000 km2 per year (111) in tropical regions is partially balanced by a net forest gain of 8,700 km2 per year in Europe (110). However, part of the net forest gain is the result of new forest plantations, often with exotic species, which often have lower biodiversity than natural forests (113). Fire plays a major role in many regions in the conversion of forest to agriculture but also in maintaining open landscapes. As expected, there is an agreement between the spatial distribution of areas of natural habitat being converted to agriculture and the distribution of species affected by habitat loss (Figure 7a,b), including in Madagascar, some areas of sub-Saharan Africa, Brazil's Atlantic Forest, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. Forest loss in Southeast Asia is not well captured in our land-use change map but has been reported in other studies (57). There are some regions where there is a high proportion of species affected by habitat loss where most land-use change already occurred in the past (much of Europe), and regions where species have been affected by habitat loss not captured in our analysis (e.g., the Sahara). River systems have been deeply altered by impoundments and diversions to meet water, energy, and transportation needs of a growing human population (14). Today, there are more than 45,000 large dams (>15 m in height) worldwide (14). Dams have upstream impacts, where lotic systems are changed into lentic systems, and downstream impacts, where the timing, magnitude, and temperature of water flow is changed (45). Dams are also responsible for the fragmentation of river systems, as they hamper or even block the dispersal and migration of organisms (14). Furthermore, water resource development by impoundments and diversions has high spatial overlap with other pressures in freshwater ecosystems, such as pollution and catchment disturbance by cropland (114). Other important habitat changes in freshwater ecosystems include the loss of wetlands owing to drainage for conversion to agriculture or urbanization, overextraction of groundwater (45), and the excavation of river sand (115). Marine habitats are also being affected by human activities, particularly by destructive fishing practices, such as trawling and dynamiting (116). Coastal habitats and wetlands have been affected mostly by urbanization, aquaculture development, and coastal engineering works (15, 77). 5.2. Overexploitation Overexploitation is the major driver of biodiversity loss in the oceans (2, 19). Capture fisheries production increased for much of the twentieth century but has reached a plateau since the mid-1980s at around 70–80 million tons annually, despite continuing increases in global fishing effort levels (117, 118). The global landings would have likely declined except for the spatial expansion of the fishing effort toward deeper and further offshore waters. By the mid-1960s, most fully exploited or overexploited fisheries were located in coastal areas of the Northern Hemisphere. By the 1980s, fishing efforts were having an impact on regions much farther away from the coast, in the middle of the northern and southern Atlantic Oceans. One decade later, the spatial expansion of the fisheries had reached much of the world's oceans, with only some parts of the Indian Ocean, the Pacific Ocean, and the Antarctic ocean not having reached maximum historical catches (116). In terrestrial systems, hunting is a major concern in tropical savannahs and forests (2). Large birds and mammals are targeted for their meat and charismatic species for their ornaments and alleged medicinal purposes (108, 111). Wild-meat harvest has been estimated at 67–164 thousand tons in the Brazilian Amazon and 1–3.4 million tons in Central Africa (119). The impacts are particularly acute in Southeast Asia and Central Africa (111). A connection has been established between the reduction of fish availability per capita and the increase in hunting pressure of wild meat in West Africa (120). Synergistic interactions between hunting and other drivers, such as land-use change and disease, can also occur and cause local extinctions (106). 5.3. Pollution Eutrophication and other ecosystem changes caused by pollution are major drivers of biodiversity loss and alterations in both inland waters and coastal systems (121). River nitrogen loads from point sources, such as domestic and industrial sewage, and nonpoint sources, such as agriculture and atmospheric deposition, increased in most world regions from 1970 to 1995 but are starting to decline or are projected to decline until 2030 in Europe and northern Asia (Russia) (122). Lakes are particularly vulnerable to regime shifts caused by eutrophi-cation, which may be difficult to reverse (47, 123). Eutrophication can lead to increased biomass of phytoplankton and macrophyte vegetation, blooms of toxic cyanobacteria and other algae, higher incidence of fish kills, and, in the case of coral reefs, declines in coral reef health and loss of coral reef communities (121). Atmospheric nitrogen deposition from intensive agriculture and fossil-fuel combustion can also affect terrestrial ecosystems, particularly temperate grasslands (2). The increase in availability of nitrogen changes the competition dynamics in plant (124) and lichen communities (125), favoring the increase of nitrophilous species and the decline of nitrogen-sensitive species. One study found a linear relationship between the rate of nitrogen deposition and species richness declines in temperate grasslands and estimated that, for the levels of nitrogen deposition observed in much of central Europe (17 kg/ha/year), a 23% reduction of species diversity can be expected (124). Unfortunately, some high species diversity regions (e.g., Southeast Asia and Brazil's Atlantic Forest) are also receiving similar levels of nitrogen deposition (Figure 7d), but more research is needed to identify its impacts (126). A visual inspection of the spatial overlap between the global patterns of nitrogen deposition and the distribution of vertebrates affected by pollution shows reasonable agreement in Europe, but inspection also shows disagreement in other parts of the world, such as Central Africa (Figure 7c,d). Note, however, that there are other sources of pollution included in the assessment of species extinction risk (Figure 7c) and not directly related to atmospheric nitrogen deposition (Figure 7d). 5.4. Introduction of Exotic Species and Invasions One of the major trends in global biodiversity change is the increased homogenization of plant and animal diversity owing to biotic exchange. In some cases, exotic species are able to spread beyond the places where they were introduced, spreading in the landscape and outcompeting native species (127). Islands have been particularly affected by invasive species (128): Animal invasions have led to species extinctions, whereas plant invasions can decrease the abundance of native species and become dominant in plant communities. Plant invasions may also affect the nutrient cycles, alter the fire regimes, and impact other ecosystem services (129, 130). A particularly serious type of invasions is epidemic disease. One example is chytridiomycosis, which has been decimating amphibians in many regions of the world and is a leading cause of the global amphibian decline (131). Invasive species have also had important impacts on freshwater ecosystems, where their incidence is correlated with human economic activity (132), and in marine and estuarine ecosystems due to ballast water or hull fouling transported by ships (133). Still, many invasive species have had more moderate impacts on ecosystems (134), and recently, some ecologists have called for a more embracing attitude toward exotic species, arguing that alien species should not be a priori considered negative in an ecosystem but should be assessed objectively for their impacts (135, 136). Others have argued for active translocation or assisted migration of species endangered by climate change (137), an approach that seems fraught with peril on the basis of our historical experience of human introductions of exotic species, often with the best intentions. 5.5. Climate Change Global mean surface temperature increased 0.74°C from 1906 to 2005 and is expected to increase between 1.8°C and 4°C during the twenty-first century, depending on the socio-economic scenario (138). Warming is spatially very heterogeneous as it is largest in terrestrial systems and at high northern latitudes, with recent warming greater than 1.5ºC in some areas, and least pronounced in the tropics, where many regions have warmed around 0.5ºC (Figure 7f). The impacts of climate change are already contributing to increased extinction risk of species at high northern latitudes (Figure 7e). Further climate change impacts in these regions have been projected for birds (139) and for plants (46) during this century. Surprisingly, in the Cape region (South Africa) and in southeastern Australia, a high incidence of species negatively affected by climate change has been reported (Figure 7e), although these areas are not suffering large warming (Figure 7f). One explanation may be that those regions have many species particularly vulnerable to climate change. Species with high vulnerability are species that have narrow climate niches, cannot shift their ranges, or are unable to change their phenology, evolve their physiology, or behaviorally adapt to the new conditions (93, 140). For instance, the limited ability of mountaintop species to shift in elevation has been identified as a major climate vulnerability (92). For amphibians, important future climate impacts have been projected in the northern Andes, parts of the Amazon, Central America, southern and southeastern Europe, sub-Saharan tropical Africa, and Southeast Asia (140, 141). Surprisingly, this disagrees somewhat from the recent spatial patterns of increased extinction risk owing to climate change (Figure 7e). In corals, most threatened and climate change–susceptible species occur in Southeast Asia (140). Climate change is also causing sea-level rise and threatening coastal habitats, particularly in synergy with land-use change, which may not allow coastal habitats to migrate inland (47). Marine ecosystems are also affected by ocean acidification caused by climate change, particularly corals (79) and other marine organisms that build calcium carbonate skeletons (142).
A large body of research suggests that increasing environmental variability associated with global climate change often, although not always, leads to negative demographic consequences for populations in the long run (McLaughlin et al. 2002; Drake 2005; Burgmer & Hillebrand 2011). Studies of evolutionary rescue have, however, paid little attention to the impact of environmental fluctuations, although a realistic scenario of environmental deterioration must observe fluctuations on short-term time scales (Karl et al. 1995; Bell & Collins 2008). In an environment with a deteriorating trend, fluctuations may lead to both phases of highly stressful conditions and episodes of more benign environmental conditions. Phases of extremely harsh environmental conditions are akin to very severe environmental deterioration, which is likely to reduce the chance of evolutionary rescue (Bell 2013; Lindsey et al. 2013). Our study shows that periodic environmental amelioration can also limit evolutionary rescue. Taken together, these results imply that the potential for rapid evolutionary adaptation to mitigate biodiversity loss might be limited in the face of increased climate variability. In our experiment, temporary environmental amelioration could cause demographic recovery during the early stage of the experiment (Fig. 2), but ultimately reduced the chance of evolutionary rescue in the late stage (Fig. 1). It is likely that evolutionary rescue in this experimental system was mainly limited by the fixation, not the appearance, of beneficial mutations. Relaxed selection, during the episodes of environmental amelioration, could have reduced the chance of fixation of the beneficial mutations that were later required for population survival in future, more stressful, environment. Thus, the ecological (demographic) benefits of periods of environmental amelioration were outweighed by the evolutionary costs, wherein the failure of evolutionary adaptation diminished any positive effect of environmental amelioration on demography in the late stage of the experiment. The fact that the environmental amelioration treatment did not interact with the bottleneck population size treatment in affecting population persistence (see Results) also suggests that the positive effect of amelioration on demography had little influence on ultimate evolutionary rescue. It could be argued that periodic environmental amelioration can function as an ‘evolutionary trap’ (Ferriere & Legendre 2013; Carlson et al. 2014), and populations ‘falling into the trap’ fail to adapt to the future environmental change. The extent to which our findings were contingent on a relatively rapid environmental change combined with modest fluctuations (relative to the rate of the directional change) is unclear. Moreover, our experimental design and study organism preclude the possibility to examine the relevance of other important ecological and evolutionary processes such as recombination and dispersal (Bell 2013; Bourne et al. 2014; Carlson et al. 2014). More research is therefore required to explore the generality of these findings under a wider range of conditions and in other organisms. Evolutionary adaptation to changing environments has attracted much interest in population genetics in the past several decades, where adaptation has usually been studied in a sense of relative fitness increase (but see Burger & Lynch 1995; Orr & Unckless 2008). It has been often suggested that lower levels of temporal autocorrelation in environmental conditions could retard [hinder] adaptation, and the inconsistency in selection over time has been a major explanation (Lande & Shannon 1996; Lenormand et al. 2009; Alto et al. 2013; Chevin 2013; Kirkpatrick & Peischl 2013; Kingsolver & Buckley 2015). Interestingly, our periodic amelioration treatment led to reduced temporal autocorrelation compared with the ‘no amelioration’ environment. The consistency of our results with the earlier population genetics studies implies that our conclusion should be fairly robust.
But where are the definite stumbling blocks, according to the authors reviewed in this paper, which hinder the success of environmental justice acting on a global scale? As has been mentioned above, the conflicting interests in different countries and their competitiveness which seeks to reach stability on a global level seems to be a major point of trouble for environmental justice. In globalizing the US American version of EJ the local interests could be pushed further into the background. In addition, in an attempt to act on a global competitive level, companies and governments, as we saw from Sachs’ (1999) paper, could use the concepts propelled by EJ to serve their own needs, thereby creating a problem of over-identification and misuse of the concepts. Can EJ as Gottlieb (2008, p.7) says, be both universal and applicable to people’s daily lives? Hamlin (2008, p. 145) poses a problem for the global applicability of EJ by suggesting that it has changed in scope and meaning. The author asks the question of whether it is “insufficiently mainstream.” The critical EJ movements however run exactly contrary to this mainstream critique. These movements seek to function on a critical level which works from the community level upwards. Therefore this obstacle does not seem to hold much weight. The author also touches on the false separation of justice from the biological embodiment (Hamlin 2008, p. 146). This separation causes the individual to be lost in the discussion of community or globalization. The human element, and its connection to nature and survival, loses its influence when only justice becomes the main focus. The application of EJ abroad is removed too far from its original intention to incorporate both the substantive and procedural into the EJ realm. Another issue for the success of the community-level approach of EJ is capitalism understood as a main roadblock to a more open social structure that benefits the more and not the few (Pellow 2009, p. 6). The author goes on to say that without putting the brakes on capitalism’s rampage the treatment of crisis can lead to misuse e.g. in the case of the Hurricane Katrina disaster (ibid, p. 4). The EJ movement can take on such obstacles by making sure people realize that “environmental concerns are not like racism or sexism which may affect a particular group of people, environmental concerns impact on us all and thus should be the concern of us all” (Lawson 2008, p. 156). However, we must still realize that the problem with the above is “the bringing together of diverse environmental stakeholders to resolve issues regarding the environment. This is particularly difficult when environmental policies appear to be rooted in class or race divisions” (Lawson, 2008, p. 156). This leads us to question whether the US movement is just a reaction to environmental racism in the US. Author Joan Martinez-Alier (2002) questions this and goes on to analyze whether, on an international level, EJ is more relevant and applicable when trying to solve problems of human and civil rights and environmental degradation. The author agrees, “the ‘minority’ focus detracts from [EJ’s] usefulness worldwide” (Martinez-Alier 2002, p. 176). Therefore, the focus on environmental racism and minority exclusion cannot become the staple of EJ if it is to be applied abroad. Martinez-Alier shows the reader that a single US worldwide model of EJ is not likely to be a successful solution to addressing crisis and inequality in other areas of the world. John W. Meyer et al. (1997) explain the power and reality of worldwide models, which do not provide as much of a critical view as EJ does, and remind us that these structures are strongly cemented in place. Meyer et al. also state that “worldwide models define and legitimate agendas for local action, shaping the structures and policies of nation-states and other national and local actors in virtually all of the domains of rationalized social life - business, politics, education, medicine, science, even the family and religion” (1997, p. 145). The result, “is nation-states that are more isomorphic than most theories would predict and change more uniformly than is commonly recognized” (Meyer et al, 1997, p. 173). Here ‘isomorphic’ means that despite the nations’ varying structures and policies they are able to be compared on a global level and change in relationship to one another instead of completely independent of one another. While the structures are hard in place they apparently offer the chance for local change to happen.
Although environmental justice can be understood in a number of ways, it is most importantly a way of moving forward to achieve the common goal of reducing inequalities (Masuda 2008). A strategy to achieve this common goal would be to create and implement policy. However, the policy-making arena is highly political and rapidly changing, and the transformation and utilisation of evidence into policy is influenced by the capacities, values, and beliefs, resources, and partnership links of individuals or organisations (Bowen and Zwi 2005). In other words, the policy-making process is vulnerable to the possibility of bias and may be influenced one way or another by individuals or organisations holding more power and access to resources, making the incorporation of emergent or less-conventional perspectives a potential challenge. At present, the United States has an explicit policy on environmental justice, while Canada and the UK do not. What do the findings of this review denote for policy creation (Canada and the UK) or policy modification (USA)? From a definitional standpoint, it can be argued that because ecological integrity is absent from environmental justice definitions, it will be overlooked in policy creation. Furthermore, the frequent reference to the EPA definition suggests that it has enormous potential to influence other policy frameworks. In revisiting and creating new frames for environmental justice, we urge activists and scholars to explore literature outside the mainstream in order to better incorporate the concept of ecological integrity. This includes Indigenous scholarship as well as scholarship on eco-justice and “just sustainability”, the latter of which aims to link notions of environmental justice and sustainability and is gaining popularity in the UK (Agyeman and Evans 2004). Recognising that every research undertaking has its limitations, the findings of this study ultimately serve to strengthen the value of eco-justice, just sustainability, and Indigenous perspectives by providing a departure point for further exploration of such lines of inquiry and worldviews.
First, is the global warming caused by CO2 emissions irreversible?  Unfortunately, on any time scale of relevance to existing human civilizations, the answer to this question is “no”, the warming we cause is not reversible.   There are two reasons for this.  One is that even if we stopped all man-causes CO2 emissions today, it would take about 200 years for today’s elevated level of atmospheric CO2, approaching 400 ppm, to naturally decay down to a level of about 340 ppm, a level we had in 1980 – still much higher than the preindustrial level of 280 ppm. Yes, it takes a long time for the extra biological carbon we put into the Earth’s carbon cycle to dissipate into stable geological reservoirs of carbon such as limestone. And yes, it will take about 200 years to undo the CO2 increase we have caused over the last 30 years. In addition, the heating of the Earth is delayed by the huge thermal inertia of our oceans, and the timescale of that delay just happens to be nearly equal to the rate of CO2 decay just described. Thus, these two slow processes described above go in opposite directions and tend to cancel each other’s effect so that the Earth’s temperature will remain approximately constant after that envisioned point in time when all anthropogenic CO2 emissions have been eliminated. Then, of course, what has taken a long time to warm up (the oceans primary) also takes a long time to cool off. Putting all of this together, the warming we have created to date is approximately what we are stuck with in the future.  That is, the temperature change that has been caused up to present is already set and is not reversible.
Global temperature change observed over the last hundred years or so is well within the natural variability of the last 8,000 years, according to a new paper by a former Intergovernmental Panel On Climate Change (IPCC) lead author. Dr. Philip Lloyd, a South Africa-based physicist and climate researcher, examined ice core-based temperature data going back 8,000 years to gain perspective on the magnitude of global temperature changes over the 20th Century. What Lloyd found was that the standard deviation of the temperature over the last 8,000 years was about 0.98 degrees Celsius– higher than the 0.85 degrees climate scientists say the world has warmed over the last century. “This suggests that while some portion of the temperature change observed in the 20th century was probably caused by greenhouse gases, there is a strong likelihood that the major portion was due to natural variations,” Lloyd wrote in his study. The United Nations’ IPCC claims there’s been 0.85 degrees Celsius of warming since the late 1800s, and concludes that most of this warming is due to human activities– mainly, the burning of fossil fuels and changes in land use. The IPCC says that “more than half of the observed increase in global average surface temperature from 1951 to 2010” have been caused by human activity. If Lloyd’s results hold, the IPCC may have to revise how much warming it attributes to mankind. In any case, the IPCC’s estimate of man-made and natural warming (0.85 degrees) is still below the standard deviation for the last 8,000, according to Lloyd’s results. This means that warming is not very significant within the context of the Earth’s recent climate history.
An extensively peer-reviewed study published last December in the Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics indicates that observed climate changes since 1850 are linked to cyclical, predictable, naturally occurring events in Earth’s solar system with little or no help from us. The research was conducted by Nicola Scafetta, a scientist at Duke University and at the Active Cavity Radiometer Solar Irradiance Monitor Lab (ACRIM), which is associated with the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California. It takes issue with methodologies applied by the U.N.’s Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) using “general circulation climate models” (GCMs) that, by ignoring these important influences, are found to fail to reproduce the observed decadal and multi-decadal climatic cycles. As noted in the paper, the IPCC models also fail to incorporate climate modulating effects of solar changes such as cloud-forming influences of cosmic rays throughout periods of reduced sunspot activity. More clouds tend to make conditions cooler, while fewer often cause warming. At least 50-70% of observed 20th century warming might be associated with increased solar activity witnessed since the “Maunder Minimum” of the last 17th century. Dr. Scafetta’s study applies an astronomically-based model that reconstructs and correlates known warming and cooling phases with decadal and multi-decadal cycles associated with influences of planetary motions, most particularly those of Jupiter and Saturn. This “astronomical harmonics model” was used to address various cycles lasting 9.1, 10-10.5, 20-21, and 60-62 year-long periods. The 9.1-year cycle was shown to be likely related to decadal solar/lunar tidal oscillations, while those of ten years and longer duration relate to planetary movements about the Sun that may have solar influences that modulate electromagnetic properties of Earth’s upper atmosphere which can regulate the cloud system. Scafetta’s findings contradict IPCC claims that all warming observed from 1970 to 2000 has been man-made (“anthropogenically-induced”) based upon models that exclude natural quasi 20-year and 60-year climate cycle contributions. These cycles have been clearly detected in all global surface temperature records of both hemispheres since 1850, and are also evident in numerous astronomical records. The 60-year cycle is particularly easy to observe in significant surface temperature maxima that occurred in 1880-1881, 1940-1941, and 2000-2001. These momentarily warmer periods coincided with times when orbital positions of Jupiter and Saturn were relatively close to the Sun and Earth. A 60-year modulation cycle also corresponds with warming/cooling induced in the ocean surface which appears to correlate with the frequency of major Atlantic hurricanes, and is seen in the sea level rise since 1700 as well as in numerous ocean and terrestrial records dating back centuries. Further evidence of a 60-year cycle is referenced in ancient Sanskrit texts among observed monsoon rainfall cycles. Scafetta believes that a natural 60-year climate cycle associated with astronomical cycles may also explain calendars adopted in traditional Chinese, Tamil and Tibetan civilizations, since all major ancient civilizations knew about 20-year and 60-year Jupiter and Saturn cycles. Indeed, Scafetta pointed out to me that in the Hindu tradition, the 60-year cycle is known as the cycle of Brihaspati, the name of Jupiter, and that every 60 years special ceremonies are celebrated by some populations, such as the Sigui ceremony among the Dogon people of Africa. Proper reconstructions of natural 20-year and 60-year cycles, along with other independent studies, indicate that the IPCC has seriously overestimated human climate contributions. For example, according to all GCM simulations, increased CO2 concentrations should have produced an increased tropical warming trend with altitude, which is contrary to what balloon and satellites observations actually show. GCM interpretations also allege that volcano activity may have contributed an offsetting 0.1-0.2 degrees of cooling influence between from 1970 to 2000. However, that conclusion appears to significantly overestimate the volcano signal because the models predicted deep and large cooling spikes associated with eruptions which are observed to be much smaller in global surface temperature records. Accordingly, this too suggests that the 1970-2000 warming effect attributed to anthropogenic influences should be reduced. Moreover, some of the observed 0.5 degrees of warming recorded by surface stations during the 1970-2000 period which IPCC models associated with human greenhouse gases emissions, may be explained by improperly corrected urban “heat island” effects and other land use change influences. Finally, three major available global surface temperature record sources report a steady-to-cooling trend since 2001. These measurements contradict the strong warming predicted by all IPCC models during the same period that are attributed primarily to a continuing increase in CO2 emissions. Indeed, only one global surface record source shows a slight increase in the temperature since 2001. This occurred because missing temperature data needed to be adjusted or filled in to complete the records…which appears to be the case with NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies model data resulting from poor sampling during the last decade for Antarctic and Arctic regions and the use of a 1200 km smoothing methodology. The Duke University/NASA JPL study estimates that as much as 0.3 degrees of warming from 1970 to 2000 may have been naturally induced by the 60-year modulation during the warming phase, amounting to at least 43-60% of the 0.5-0.7 degrees allegedly caused by human greenhouse emissions. Additional natural warming can be explained by increased solar activity during the last four centuries, as well as simply being part of a natural and persistent warming recovery since the end of the Little Ice Age of AD 1300-1900.
DURHAM, N.C. – A new study based on 1,000 years of temperature records suggests global warming is not progressing as fast as it would under the most severe emissions scenarios outlined by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). “Based on our analysis, a middle-of-the-road warming scenario is more likely, at least for now,” said Patrick T. Brown, a doctoral student in climatology at Duke University’s Nicholas School of the Environment. “But this could change.” The Duke-led study shows that natural variability in surface temperatures -- caused by interactions between the ocean and atmosphere, and other natural factors -- can account for observed changes in the recent rates of warming from decade to decade. The researchers say these “climate wiggles” can slow or speed the rate of warming from decade to decade, and accentuate or offset the effects of increases in greenhouse gas concentrations. If not properly explained and accounted for, they may skew the reliability of climate models and lead to over-interpretation of short-term temperature trends. The research, published today in the peer-reviewed journal Scientific Reports, uses empirical data, rather than the more commonly used climate models, to estimate decade-to-decade variability. “At any given time, we could start warming at a faster rate if greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere increase without any offsetting changes in aerosol concentrations or natural variability,” said Wenhong Li, assistant professor of climate at Duke, who conducted the study with Brown. The team examined whether climate models, such as those used by the IPCC, accurately account for natural chaotic variability that can occur in the rate of global warming as a result of interactions between the ocean and atmosphere, and other natural factors. To test how accurate climate models are at accounting for variations in the rate of warming, Brown and Li, along with colleagues from San Jose State University and the USDA, created a new statistical model based on reconstructed empirical records of surface temperatures over the last 1,000 years. “By comparing our model against theirs, we found that climate models largely get the ‘big picture’ right but seem to underestimate the magnitude of natural decade-to-decade climate wiggles,” Brown said. “Our model shows these wiggles can be big enough that they could have accounted for a reasonable portion of the accelerated warming we experienced from 1975 to 2000, as well as the reduced rate in warming that occurred from 2002 to 2013.” Further comparative analysis of the models revealed another intriguing insight. “Statistically, it’s pretty unlikely that an 11-year hiatus in warming, like the one we saw at the start of this century, would occur if the underlying human-caused warming was progressing at a rate as fast as the most severe IPCC projections,” Brown said. “Hiatus periods of 11 years or longer are more likely to occur under a middle-of-the-road scenario.”
Curbing the world’s huge and increasing appetite for meat is essential to avoid devastating climate change, according to a new report. But governments and green campaigners are doing nothing to tackle the issue due to fears of a consumer backlash, warns the analysis from the thinktank Chatham House. The global livestock industry produces more greenhouse gas emissions than all cars, planes, trains and ships combined, but a worldwide survey by Ipsos MORI in the report finds twice as many people think transport is the bigger contributor to global warming. “Preventing catastrophic warming is dependent on tackling meat and dairy consumption, but the world is doing very little,” said Rob Bailey, the report’s lead author. “A lot is being done on deforestation and transport, but there is a huge gap on the livestock sector. There is a deep reluctance to engage because of the received wisdom that it is not the place of governments or civil society to intrude into people’s lives and tell them what to eat.” The recent landmark report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change found that dietary change can “substantially lower” emissions but there is no UN plan to achieve that. Past calls to cut meat eating by high-profile figures, from the chief of the UN’s climate science panel to the economist Lord Stern, have been both rare and controversial. Other scientists have proposed a meat tax to curb consumption, but the report concludes that keeping meat eating to levels recommended by health authorities would not only lower emissions but also reduce heart disease and cancer. “The research does not show everyone has to be a vegetarian to limit warming to 2C, the stated objective of the world’s governments,” said Bailey. The report builds on recent scientific studies which show that soaring meat demand in China and elsewhere could tip the world’s climate into chaos. Emissions from livestock, largely from burping cows and sheep and their manure, currently make up almost 15% of global emissions. Beef and dairy alone make up 65% of all livestock emissions. Appetite for meat is rocketing as the global population swells and becomes more able to afford meat. Meat consumption is on track to rise 75% by 2050, and dairy 65%, compared with 40% for cereals. By 2020, China alone is expected to be eating 20m tonnes more of meat and dairy a year. Two recent peer-reviewed studies calculated that, without severe cuts in this trend, agricultural emissions will take up the entire world’s carbon budget by 2050, with livestock a major contributor. This would mean every other sector, including energy, industry and transport, would have to be zero carbon, which is described as “impossible”. The Chatham House report concludes: “Dietary change is essential if global warming is not to exceed 2C.” The consumer survey in the report, covering 12 nations including the US, China, India, Brazil and the EU bloc, found a link between the awareness of climate change and its impacts and the willingness to change behaviour. Acceptance that human activities cause climate change was significantly higher in China, India and Brazil than in the US, UK and Japan. The good news, said Bailey, was that “the majority of future demand appears to be in the countries [like China and Brazil] that are the most receptive to change”. He said it was “pretty disappointing” that in developed countries, where meat and dairy eating is highest, awareness of livestock’s impact on the climate is low and willingness to change is low.
A new partnership will bring together organisations from across the globe to improve access to weather forecasts and climate information. The UK government and the Met Office will join forces with the US government, NASA and Google to help improve early warning systems for natural disasters across the developing world, International Development Secretary Justine Greening said today. The new partnership, launched in Washington D.C. today, will bring together organisations from across the globe to improve access to weather forecasts and climate information in poor countries. This will help farmers to plan ahead and boost food production as well as help to predict and plan for weather related disasters like droughts, floods and storms. Justine Greening said: The UK’s Met Office is home to some of the world’s leading climate scientists. Our British Met Office experts, NASA and Google will improve the weather warnings the poorest countries need to get better prepared earlier for devastating natural disasters such as droughts, floods and storms. The work these leading British experts will be doing won’t just boost vital agricultural production and protect livelihoods, it will also, ultimately, save lives across the developing world. Met Office Chief Scientist Professor Dame Julia Slingo said: This partnership will tap into the enormous potential for science to provide better tools to help people in the developing world tackle the risks from weather and climate extremes, something drawn out by the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction agreed earlier this year. The tools and services developed through this partnership will contribute significantly to greater resilience and preparedness, helping to protect the lives and property of some of the poorest in the world. DFID’s contribution to the project will support projects that will: Strengthen early warning systems for drought, floods and storms and ensure warnings reach the most vulnerable people Bring new forecasting technologies into use, giving people more time to prepare for extreme weather Produce the first continent-wide detailed future climate projections for Africa working with the Met Office, UK universities and African scientists Help businesses, governments and communities in developing countries to adapt to climate change through making better information available As well as producing high-resolution climate projections for Africa, the Met Office will: Support the modernisation of weather services in Africa and Asia by building their in-country capabilities Develop weather and climate data, information and services to help prepare for extreme weather now and in the future Work with partners on the ground to test new ways of communicating weather forecasts and climate information, such as seasonal forecasts Google will provide free access to one petabyte (1,000 terabytes) of cloud storage to house satellite observations and climate and weather data.
Recent disasters such as the earthquake in Nepal or the Ebola outbreak in West Africa have brought renewed calls for technology to support search and rescue as well as streamlining communication among first responders. The government technology community has responded in force -- with data, satellite imagery and applications: The National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency has created an public website in to host unclassified geospatial intelligence data, products and services in support of U.S. and international relief efforts following the Nepal earthquake. NGA launched its website the day after the earthquake, sharing the platform it used for its Ebola support site, which launched in October 2014. Both use Esri’s ArcGIS platform and are hosted by Amazon Web Services. The Nepal portal hosts search and rescue atlases covering Kathmandu and six other affected areas, with maps, imagery and data overlaid to assist rescuers and relief planners. Other products and data layers will be added as they become available, NGA said. NGA also is providing direct support to disaster relief and humanitarian organizations through the All Partners Access Network, through which the Defense Department shares unclassified information with non-military organizations around the world. NASA said it is supplying optical and radar satellite data pulled from a number of domestic and international partners and compiling them into a variety of data "products." These include vulnerability maps and damage proxy maps that can tag danger zones and determine the extent of existing damage in other areas. In addition to the imaging data, NASA said it has also dispatched a new ground-based portable radar sensor called FINDER (Finding Individuals for Disaster and Emergency Response), which can locate people buried as deep as 30 feet below crushed materials and 20 feet below solid concrete, based on their heartbeats and breathing patterns. The technology was developed by the Department of Homeland Security's Science and Technology Directorate. The data gathered by satellite will be used to create risk models and assess infrastructure damage. The data can also be used to see into remote areas where landslides, river damming and avalanches might complicate recovery efforts. A joint initiative between NASA and the U.S. Agency for International Development, meanwhile, integrates satellite observations, ground-based data and forecast models to monitor and forecast environmental changes and to improve response to natural disasters. The project, called SERVIR, originally began in 2004 as a collaborative effort that also included the World Bank and the Central American Commission for Environment and Development. And new software, developed by two summer interns, now makes it possible for the SERVIR team to segment the large disaster images into subsets or ‘tiles’ that can be transmitted to recipients in in Nepal, where bandwidth is currently limited. Then the software reconstructs the pieces on the recipient’s side, where the images can be printed. Earlier this year, the U.S. Geological Survey released several sets of data collected on land elevations in India in order to help scientists better understand and monitor rising sea levels. The data was also made available for public viewing via the USGS’s Earth Explorer website. It is believed that the release and examination of these image data sets will assist in preparedness for droughts, glacial retreats, flooding, landslides and coastal storm surges. In light of the disaster in Nepal and others such as Hurricane Sandy, the White House has announced several new ideas, tools and initiatives under America’s PrepareAthon! and National Day of Action, which is aimed at “encouraged entrepreneurs, makers, technologists, and creative #DisasterTech innovators to get involved, unleash innovation.” Examples of new initiatives announced include the Department of Health and Human Service’s GeoHEALTH platform, which features interactive mapping to support agencies and community organizations in preparing for the health impacts of emergencies.
Since the early 1990s the US conservative movement has become increasingly hostile towards environmental protection (Jacques et al., 2008 and McCright and Dunlap, 2000). Conservative foundations, think tanks, and elites have mobilized to challenge the legitimacy of environmental problems and thus undercut the necessity for government action to deal with them (McCright and Dunlap, 2003). This is especially the case with respect to anthropogenic climate change (e.g., Demeritt, 2006 and McCright and Dunlap, 2010), but also holds true for environmental science and policy more generally (e.g., Brown, 1997 and Goodell, 2010). Political polarization on the environment among political elites (e.g., party activists and members of Congress) has resulted from this increasing anti-environmentalism of conservatives and Republicans (e.g., Dunlap et al., 2001 and Gershtenson et al., 2006), a trend amplified by the conservative movement-supported Tea Party pulling the Republican Party even farther to the Right (Skocpol and Williamson, 2013). Consistent with the expectations of party sorting theory, such political polarization on the environment has extended to the US general public (Guber, 2013). Since 1992, there has been significant partisan and ideological polarization on support for government spending on environmental protection within the general public. This political polarization is unlikely to reverse course without a noticeable convergence in support of environmental protection among political elites (see, e.g. Brulle et al., 2012), with prominent conservative figures and Republican Party leaders becoming less anti-environmental in their public statements and voting records. Within the general public, political polarization has serious implications for fostering support for environmental protection. For some time now, political orientation (party identification and political ideology) has been one of the strongest predictors of environmental concern. Furthermore, recent studies find that political orientation moderates the well-established positive relationship between education and environmental concern—not only on the issue of anthropogenic climate change (e.g., Hamilton, 2011, Hamilton and Keim, 2009, McCright, 2011 and McCright and Dunlap, 2011), but also on seemingly less controversial issues of urban sprawl impacts, the conservation of natural resources, and support for conservation regulations (Hamilton et al., 2010). The effect of increased education on environmental concern is positive for liberals and Democrats, but is weaker or negative for conservatives and Republicans, undercutting the efficacy of efforts to “educate the public” about the seriousness of environmental problems and the importance of taking action to deal with them. Political polarization also shows up in environmentally relevant behaviors and reactions to campaigns to stimulate such behaviors. For example, Costa and Kahn, 2010 and Costa and Kahn, 2013 find that liberal homeowners consume less energy than do their conservative counterparts, and are more likely to respond to campaigns designed to encourage energy conservation. In fact, they report that “while energy conservation ‘nudges’ work with liberals, they backfire with conservatives” (Costa and Kahn, 2010, p. 19). Similarly, Gromet et al., 2013) find that self-identified conservatives are less likely than their liberal counterparts to support energy efficiency when it is framed as a means of reducing carbon dioxide emissions, and less likely than liberals to purchase an energy efficient product if its packaging includes a pro-environmental message (e.g., “Protect the Environment”). The fact that political identifications among the general public not only influence their support for environmental protection programs (as suggested by our results), but also their environmentally relevant behaviors and responses to campaigns to promote such behaviors, is striking. Further, this is a major departure from earlier decades (1970s and 1980s) when there was only a modest political divide on environmental issues in the general public. Combined with the enormous degree of current polarization among political elites on the environment, the situation does not bode well for our nation’s ability to deal effectively with the wide range of environmental problems—from local toxics to global climate change—we currently face.
Carroll Muffett: There are a number of challenges that face international environmental law. One of the most important is political will. The best laws in the world won't matter if countries don't have the political will to take them seriously and to enforce them. Closely related to the question of political will, which applies across every country, is the question capacity, technical capacity, financial capacity and the infrastructure to enforce the laws. For the last 20 years and more, the developing world has looked to countries like the US, looked to the countries of Europe and the OECD to provide financial support so that if developing countries are taking on new commitments under these treaties, there is some sort of technical and financial assistance to help them meet those commitments. Regrettably one of the most consistent themes that we've seen over these last 20 years is that those financial commitments from the developed countries to the developing countries are not being met. What can be done to encourage that political will? I think that's a thousand dollar question. In terms of creating political will, moments like this UNEA conference help coalesce and help focus that will. They provide terrific moments for countries to make political statements, to make political commitments that do count for something. Ultimately the challenge lies in what happens when leaders leave the UN and go back to their capitals. Are they getting the support internally to deliver on those commitments? One of the biggest challenges we see here in the US is that for many years our own Congress and particularly our own Senate have been a key barrier to delivering on those commitments. And so ironically whereas the US was an early leader in the development of international environmental law for many years, now we've been a barrier to progress in international environmental law. One rare promising sign is that the US was actually the first country to ratify the new mercury convention. What has been the impact of the slow progress in implementing internal environmental laws? We see the impacts all around us. If you look at rising global temperatures and the impacts of climate change which are increasingly evident all around us - that's a clear impact of failing to deliver on commitments that were made to the international community. If you look at declining biodiversity and accelerating rates of extinction and species loss - that is evidence of continuing failure to meet commitments to the international community with respect to biodiversity. Ironically, wildlife trade is one of the areas where the international community made a great deal of early progress under the CITES treaty (Convention on International Trade and Endangered Species). The international community adopted it in the early 1970s and many of the problems we were facing at the time have now receded into the past. CITES is a testament to how we can solve problems if we work at them together. But commitment to wildlife enforcement has to remain constant. One of the challenges to CITES has been that the trade itself doesn't go away and so you need constant vigilance. Here again you face the question of political will. If you look at the moratorium on elephant ivory under CITES, in its early history, this was a place where elephant populations began to recover and the ban was having a positive effect. Not satisfied to let that ban stay in place, parties under pressure began adopting exceptions and loopholes to the elephant ivory ban. Those exceptions and loopholes sent signals to poachers on the ground and you know what - there was a market there again, whereas once there was no market, now there's market.
A Familiar Concern However, this analysis does not take into account the economic, geopolitical, and governmental contexts that such changes will occur in. Economic growth, international organizations, and political leaders are powerful forces that dampen the tendency for water scarcity to cause conflict. The most powerful reason why the future does not hold water wars is the reason typically used to refute Malthusian arguments—technological and economic growth. Malthus correctly predicted the explosion in human population, and the amount of humans on earth would increase by five billion by the year 2000. However, the collapse of society Malthus envisioned failed to occur. The failure of human society to collapse was largely due to the economic and technological developments that occurred around the world. Economic growth allowed more access to resources, thus enabling people to invest in technology to increase their productivity. This investment in technology enabled incredible leaps in the productivity of farmers, thanks to devices like tractors, new practices in irrigation and crop rotation, and improvements in crops due to breeding and genetic modification. Although the data is somewhat inconclusive, estimates in literature reviewing the increase in farming productivity agree that farm productivity has increased many times over since the publication of the Essay on the Principle of Population, thus averting the collapse Malthus predicted. A similar line of thought can be applied to water. Currently, many people access water from wells or rivers, sources that are susceptible to environmental changes. However, technological and economic growth allows for the development of aqueducts to service areas with little water, and the adoption of more efficient methods of using water (notably, watering plants with drip irrigation results in substantially less water loss), resulting in greater water availability. As evidenced by the development of the arid West of the United States, a lack of water does not necessarily mean that humans cannot survive, it merely means that technology and capital is required for survival. As nations continue to grow economically, they can acquire more resources and develop new technologies , such as water sanitation and treatment or desalination, to give their people better access to water, thus decreasing water scarcity over time. In fact, the University of California, San Diego’s Erik Gartzke notes that global warming is associated with a reduction, rather than increase, in interstate conflict. He goes on to note that while resource depletion associated with global warming may contribute to instability, the economic growth that is associated with it results in an overall reduction of crime. Gartzke concludes that the only way climate-induced conflict might come about is if efforts to stem global warming at the expense of economic growth lead to a loss of wealth, and thus conflict. Although water scarcity may be a factor that can cause conflict, the economic development associated with modern water scarcity results in more peace, not more war. As nations develop, they gain the technology by which they can mitigate the effects of climate change, and the capital with which to implement these technological advances. Modern times are associated with increasing rates of water depletion, but also with a rise of international institutions, diplomacy, and conflict mediation. History has shown that these forces are not always powerful enough to overcome wars fought for political or strategic reasons (notably, the Iraq war was launched to destroy the military threat of Weapons of Mass Destruction). However, water scarcity is a problem related to economic development. Thus, wars associated with water scarcity are not based in the wishes of leaders, but rather a failure of environment or leadership. International organizations are able to respond to a nation’s failures, and leaders are generally willing to receive aid to complete tasks they have been unable to accomplish. Failures in water supply and distribution can be remedied with aid, which can install wells, aqueducts, and water purification facilities to improve access to clean water. Additionally, educational aid can help develop better practices for water use and conservation in an area of water scarcity. A large proportion of drinkable water is wasted or contaminated before it is available to those who need it to survive, a problem that can be solved through proper education and infrastructure development. Examples of the power of aid to solve water issues are plentiful. In the United States, the state of California used federal assistance to construct an aqueduct from the wet North of the state to the arid South, allowing the city of Los Angeles to prosper as well as providing water to farmers along the fertile Central Valley of California. The international Non-Governmental Organization WaterAid approached the city of Takkas, in Nigeria. They installed wells, latrines, and instructed locals in best practices with regards to sanitation, resulting in a decrease in waterborne disease and an increase in water availability and thus quality of life. However, doubts about the long-term sustainability of water development projects remain since many nations do not have the capability to perform maintenance on the facilities provided to them. Thus, in terms of development, aid serves as a stopgap measure, providing critical water resources until economic growth allows nations to develop the infrastructure to indigenously refine and maintain water infrastructure. However, with regards to war, water aid is extremely effective, since temporary aid can be used to reduce tempers in the short term. Although a series of stop-gap measures is not substitute for indigenous production and maintenance of water supplies, stop-gap measures can prevent the humanitarian issue of water scarcity from causing international conflicts. Although international aid and involvement are effective tools in development assistance, international aid is perhaps even more effective in aiding negotiations regarding the provision of water. Conflict over water is relatively easy to detect, since water scarcity builds over time. International tensions regarding water trigger a series of escalating diplomatic incidents and concerns that are easy to identify and thus resolve. Since the potential conflict is over a future where one or more parties lack access to water, rather than a nation’s immediate needs, international organizations can foster negotiations to solve the problem before it gets out of hand.
Not Water Wars, Water Deals Perhaps the best example of international organization facilitating water resource allocation is the Indus Waters Treaty. The Indus River, a key source of water for Pakistan, has headwaters and tributaries in both Pakistan and India. When the partition between India and Pakistan occurred, there was great animosity between the two nations, which eventually led to a series of wars. One future source of conflict was the Indus River, a river whose resources were contested by two bitter rivals. While in the late 1950s Pakistan and India were not at war, there was great potential for water to play a role in future hostilities between the nations, perhaps exacerbating conflict. At the time, the World Bank was playing an active role in the region, seeking to aid the development of the new countries. They held substantial sway in the region thanks to their ability to provide loans to the new nations, and were therefore able to bring both India and Pakistan to the negotiating table to determine use of the river. Pakistan was concerned that India could use water as a weapon in future conflict, while India was concerned that Indians (especially those in the north of the country) would be unable to access water resources that had historically been theirs. Over a period of six years from 1954 to 1960, the World Bank helped orchestrate talks which determined which river systems were under control of India, which systems were under control of Pakistan, and how infrastructure necessary for the control of water in the river system was to be developed and funded. In 1960, thanks in part to development assistance provided by the United States and the United Kingdom, an agreement was found and the treaty was signed. After the signing of the treaty, three wars occurred, but the treaty was not broken, a testament to the power of the international agreement. Water allocation difficulties are a problem of developing nations, since developed nations can make up for scarcity with infrastructure. Thus, developing nations are most prone to water conflict, but they are also in the most need of staying in the good graces of the international community. Therefore, these countries are quick to negotiate with international organizations, making treaties and negotiation a powerful tool in addressing water conflict. Furthermore, the involvement of international organizations can redirect anger, turning potential conflicts into political matters. In 2000, the World Bank compelled Bolivia to privatize the water provider in Cochabamba, a large Bolivian city, to fund the construction of a dam. This move proved massively unpopular, sparking widespread riots. This anger over the provision of water was not directed at the Bolivian government, but instead the anger was directed at the World Bank, an international organization that mainly interacted with Bolivia through financial, rather than physical means. The World Bank and the privatized companies it endorsed became the targets, and thus rage was harmlessly fired at an international organization, rather than targeted upon the Bolivian government. In this way, international organizations served as a scapegoat, absorbing criticism in the place of the government, which was left alone to maintain the peace.
The government of Bolivia, like many governments in region susceptible to water conflict, was not itself affected by the water scarcity. Governments have the power, resources, and authority to find and secure water in their country, and a water shortage is generally unlikely to severely affect those within a government. Rather, a water shortage is felt most acutely by those with almost no power, little money, and few resources. Water shortages hit the poorest hard, and the government is slow to respond since governmental officials are generally not impacted by such shortages. While this might seem at first consideration like a factor that is more likely to exacerbate water conflicts by allowing scarcity to rise undetected, it is ultimately a major dampener on the chances of water war. While individual citizens may protest their condition, and in extreme cases mount an insurgency, these actions are unlikely to have a substantial effect on the country. The most powerless in a country already have much to protest about, and the addition of water scarcity is unlikely to dramatically alter the frequency or fervor of protest. The government of a nation must expect that some citizens cannot be fully provided for, and therefore protests are inevitable. The propensity of water shortages to impact this segment of the population means that the net effect of water shortage will be relatively small, reducing the necessity of the government to respond to the crisis. Even an insurgency will be mounted by those with many grievances and few resources, which makes the insurgency comparatively simple to combat. Critically, the government has little incentive to start a war over water shortages impacting those the state is already failing—their protests are inevitable, and the shortages do not impact the government. While water shortages will of course trigger mass protest if enough of the population is impacted, the tendency of water shortages to prey upon the most vulnerable makes the onset of such mass protest less likely. The idea of water wars fits many contemporary narratives well. In an era where we are forced to face the consequences of economic growth—pollution, climate change, and unrest—water wars seems a convenient instance of our failure to properly safeguard our natural resources. While it is easy to think of local consequences of the corruption of natural resources (for example, lung cancer resulting from air pollution), it is more difficult to give examples of widespread social change spurred by pollution. Despite a litany of international conferences issuing increasingly urgent manifestos demanding dramatic change, society has changed its patterns of consumption comparatively little, with seemingly few more widespread societal (rather than local) consequences. Although global warming threatens to destroy our way of life, society has not responded to the impacts of a warmer climate. Water wars seem to make up for this lack of action, since they are a powerful social problem easily attributable to the degradation of national resources. However, they have so far failed to meaningfully transpire, thanks to the very forces—the international geopolitical order and economic growth—that would presumably cause water wars in the first place. While the degradation of natural resources is a serious problem with modern society, the lack of water wars serves as a reminder of the power of the forces of peace and prosperity that are an inherent part of the modern world.
The terms “Water War” and “Water Wars” are media darlings. The famous quote apocryphally attributed to U.S. humorist Mark Twain “[w]hiskey is for drinking; water is for fighting over” is so overused that many water professionals are pleading to ban its use. To get a feel as to when the hysteria over water wars began, we explored Google labs tool Books Ngram Viewer which revealed that geographers were using the terms to describe water situations in the U.S. and Middle East as early as the late 1800s with an exponential increase in the use of these terms starting in 1988. Our European colleagues Mark Zeitoun and Naho Miramachi at the University of East Anglia in Norwich chronicled the proclamations from United Nations Secretary Generals Boutros Boutros-Ghali known for his 1991 quote “the next war will be fought over water, not politics,” and Kofi Annan for his 2001 quote “[f]ierce competition for freshwater may well become a source of conflict and wars in the future.” In an article published in 2011 in Global Environment Politics, David Katz addresses the important question of whether or not the “water war hypothesis” is “Hydro-political Hyperbole”. In other words, is there a potential threat of water wars or is this media hype? Water Wars: Myth or Reality? The history of international water treaties regarding surface water is robust. Over 400 treaties have been inventoried by the Transboundary Freshwater Dispute Database hosted by Oregon State University. The earliest treaty dates back to 2500 BC, following the only documented war over water in history, in Mesopotamia along the Tigris River. Our students’ research on the history of cooperation over groundwater resources is much less robust, with only one treaty specifically addressing transboundary groundwater; only a small percentage of the international water treaties have any provisions for groundwater. Our research at Oregon State University on conflict “events” described in newspapers and other media over the last fifty years reveals that countries have engaged in more than 500 conflicts over water, far outweighed by more than 1,200 cooperative events. Peter Gleick of the U.S. water think tank, the Pacific Institute, mapped the conflicts and showed that every continent has experienced a water conflict, save Antarctica. Violent conflict has occurred at sub-national levels, but there has been no international violent conflict over transboundary waters since the mid-1960s.
Why Don’t We Have Water Wars? Conflicts over water can best be described as a “wicked” planning problem that has uncertain boundaries, defies absolute solutions, and can be a symptom of larger problems. And yet even in the international arena there are indicators of cooperation. For example, the Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses was adopted by the United Nations in 1997. The UN drafted the document to help conserve and manage water resources for present and future generations. To enter into force, the document required ratification by 35 countries, and as of 2011 received 22 parties to the instrument. Regardless of the number of signatory parties, the document is considered an important step towards reaching an international law to govern water. Likewise, the UN General Assembly adopted the Law of Transboundary Aquifers by consensus in 2008. International experts in water law and hydrogeologists worked together since 2003 to create a common language in the formulation of new sets of laws on groundwater resources, and more specifically, on the value of the immense storage capabilities of aquifers. Both the Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses and the Law of Transboundary Aquifers are concrete steps towards the peaceful sharing of water resources. But what do others have to say about the potential of water wars? In his preeminent blogAguanomics, resource economist Dr. David Zetland states in his article on ‘Why We Don’t Have Water Wars’: If the war is over water, then their [winners] enjoyment can be spoiled by the losers, who have many and easy ways of destroying the quality of water. […] If this should happen, then both sides lose, changing war from a zero-sum game into a negative sum game. […] This is basically an ancient form of mutual assured destruction. Stockholm Water Prize Winner Professor J. A. “Tony” Allan pioneered the concept of “virtual” water – the invisible water embedded in traded commodities – and argues that water wars are unlikely because “trading virtual water has invisible and politically silent conflict-reducing impacts”. The concept of virtual water has been debated in the scientific literature for almost 20 years, and has become increasingly part of the international and national political discourse for about five. Allan claims that “[f]uture transboundary hydropolitics that take into account the political economy of water as well as the role of virtual water will operate differently from current transboundary international relations.” He indicates that the dependence on international trade to achieve water security is normal as most economies are net food importers. Jerry Delli Priscoli, a 30-year veteran mediator with the US Army Corps of Engineers helped us to understand that water compels us to think regionally, that (1) the price for control over an agreement over water is sharing ownership and cooperating in both the process and outcome of the agreement, (2) the transaction costs are escalating beyond traditional management methods, (3) the available money to identify needs is contracting, (4) the public awareness of water resources is growing and changing, and (5) the traditional legal systems are unable to cope with change. We are strong proponents that water ignores all separations and boundaries save for those of the watershed, both the seen and unseen parts. As such, it offers a vehicle to bring those who share it together. Since it touches all we do and experience, water creates a language through which we may discuss our common future. Much of the hype about water wars is good business for conflict beneficiaries and book sales, but in reality conflicts over transboundary waters are normal, and managing that conflict offers constant opportunities for dialogue and cooperation.
Incentives to the Media and Popular Press Provide Gripping Headlines: Simon’s claim that “bad news sells” more than good news92 seems to have ample empirical support. Cottle provides numerous examples in which the press focuses on exceptional or violent behavior,93 and New York Times reporter Max Frankel stated that among the news media “conflict is our favorite kind of news.”94 Disagreements over water allocations may be considered mundane, and thus not newsworthy, while violence over such allocations is. The need for gripping headlines ensures that the media is predisposed to favor presenting the possibility of water wars over more moderate, less dramatic positions. For example, an article in the San Francisco Chronicle was titled “Future of War Will Go with the Flow” with the subtitle “Water Promises to be Flash Point;” this, despite the fact that experts quoted in the article actually stated that they felt water was unlikely to lead to violence and that such prognostications were “media hype.”95 Watkins and Berntell, development and water experts respectively, wrote an article provocatively headlined “A Global Problem: How to Avoid War Over Water.” However, while the article warned that water shortages can lead to conºict, the authors themselves surmised that “cooperation tends to attract less news than violent conflict. Perhaps that is why ‘water wars’ get such exaggerated coverage.”96
Shorten Analysis into Sound-bite or Article-length Segment: Because the media are increasingly structured around presenting brief sound-bites or catchy headlines,97 they frequently reduce complex issues into memorable catchphrases and simplistic storylines, at the expense of nuanced explanation and accuracy. Furthermore, Bird and Dardenne contend that the media often present what they feel the story should be, rather than what the facts actually depict.98 Aubin details how pressures to provide pithy coverage of complex security issues have resulted in inaccurate media coverage and how, once established, this misinformation has managed to persist in subsequent coverage.99 The connection between water and conflict is complex and context-dependent, with several intervening and mitigating variables. An explanation of this complex relationship, however, is not amenable to short press articles or brief news segments. Give Equal Coverage to Opposing Views: The quest for “balanced coverage” itself may contribute to the amount of media exposure granted to the risk of water wars. When confronted with differing expert opinions regarding highly specialized or technical issues, the merits of which the press is not competent to evaluate, journalists often attempt to provide equal coverage, regardless of how the weight of expert opinion is distributed.100 Dunwoody and Peters refer to such a strategy of balance as “a surrogate for validity checks.”101 This provision of equal coverage, ostensibly done in the spirit of fairness and balance, can result in disproportionate representation of minority viewpoints. One survey of scientists found that 76 percent felt that news reports fail to distinguish between findings that are well-founded and those that are not.102 Press coverage of climate change is a well-documented example, in which the minority viewpoint among climate scientists that climate change is not occurring has been given disproportionately prominent media coverage.103 While no extensive content analysis of media coverage of conºict over war was undertaken for this study, numerous examples exist of articles that either present the potential for conºict or cooperation over water on equal footing or simply quote experts with a range of opinions.104
WASHINGTON, July 1, 2015 – International food prices decreased by 14% between August 2014 and May 2015, dropping to a five-year low, according to the latest edition of Food Price Watch. Cheap oil contributed to abundant global supplies of food in 2014 and prospects of a bumper crop for wheat, maize and rice in 2015—factors that are driving the sharp decline in international food prices. The agriculture and food sector continue to benefit from less expensive chemical fertilizer, fuel and transportation costs brought on by the previous year’s oil price declines, with food prices holding steady despite recent oil price hikes. Between August 2014 and May 2015, wheat prices plunged by 18%, rice prices dropped by 14% and maize prices declined by 6%. However, the arrival of El Nino, the appreciation of the U.S. dollar and the recent increase in oil prices could drive up food prices in the coming months. The demand for maize by the biofuel industry and developments in rice support policies among major producers are other factors that could impact food prices.
How the World Bank Group is helping The World Bank Group is committed to boosting agriculture and agriculture-related investment. In 2014, new commitments to agriculture and related sectors were $8.3 billion. For IBRD/IDA, assistance to agriculture and related sectors rose to $4.3 billion in FY14 from $3.6 billion in FY13. IFC made $4.0 billion in private sector investments across the food supply chain in FY14. These investments supported projects that promote access to finance, access to inputs like seeds, equipment and advice, and access to markets through infrastructure and food-processing facilities. Launched by the World Bank in 2008, the Global Food Price Crisis Response Program (GFRP) provides relief to countries hit by high food prices. The GFRP has reached nearly 70 million people in 49 countries—through $1.6 billion in emergency funds for farming, seeds and fertilizer, and emergency school feeding programs. The WBG supports the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP). Ten countries and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation have pledged about $1.4 billion with $1.2 billion received. Coordinating with UN agencies through the High-Level Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis and with non-governmental organizations, and supporting the Partnership for Agricultural Market Information System (AMIS) to improve international food market transparency. Advocacy for more investment in agriculture research–including through the Consultative Group on International Agriculture Research (CGIAR) – and monitoring trade to identify potential food shortages. Supporting improved nutrition among vulnerable groups: During the past decade (2003-2013), the International Development Association (IDA), the World Bank's fund for the poorest, has ensured that more than 210 million pregnant/lactating women, adolescent girls, and/or children under age five were reached by basic nutrition services. The Bank is also an active member of the Scaling Up Nutrition Global Movement and leads the SecureNutrition Knowledge Platform, which aims to improve nutrition outcomes through increased nutrition-sensitive investments and activities across all key underlying drivers of nutrition.
After more than 30 years of generally falling grain prices, it came as a shock when the cost of cereals spiked between late 2007 and early 2008. The price of maize and wheat doubled, while rice trebled in cost. Though prices fell back, harvest shocks in 2010 (Black Sea countries) and 2012 (US mid-west) caused another, less dramatic increase. Unsurprisingly, some observers wondered if high and unstable cereals prices were the new norm. The system, it seemed, was broken. But it is increasingly clear that it is not. World cereals prices have fallen back again, and major price rises seem unlikely in the near future. So what's been going on? With the benefit of hindsight, the spike of 2007-08 was caused by three major changes: higher oil prices, an explosion of ethanol production in the US, and rising wages in parts of Asia. These factors left the cereals market, where stocks were already low, vulnerable to harvest failures. When those failures occurred, in 2006 and 2007, prices rose. Further increases followed when some governments panicked, either by limiting exports or importing more in a tight market. Since 2007, farmers have been trying to adjust to the new conditions. However, owing to the harvest failures of 2010 and 2012, and the surprising growth of US demand for distillation to ethanol, which continued through to 2011, it has taken them until recently to do so. Finally, though, the market seems to have recovered equilibrium. There have been few harvest shocks over the past 18 months, while the expansion of ethanol in the US has halted. Oil prices, meanwhile, have barely risen since 2011. Above all, farmers have finally caught up with the prices, planting more and raising yields. Grain production has increased significantly since 2007. In the seven years before the spike, cereals production grew by just 9%, by 146m tonnes; in the seven years since, there has been a 16% increase, by 329m tonnes. Surprisingly, almost three-quarters of the increase has come from the developing world, not from the traditional grain exporters of North America, Australia, South America and the Black Sea countries. That's partly a response to higher prices, but it also reflects the efforts of governments and donors – including the $22bn (£13bn) promised at the L'Aquila meeting of the G8 in 2009 – to help farmers boost production. In many developing countries farmers were assisted to get seed and fertiliser, and in some cases price incentives were introduced. Although cereals prices have fallen back, they are still higher than they were in 2005: in constant terms, 74% higher for maize, 60% more for wheat, and 32% more for rice. That's because oil prices have risen by 70% since 2005, and with them the cost of fertiliser; an astonishing 130m tonnes of maize is turned into ethanol in the US annually; and labour costs on many Asian farms have risen as jobs in cities increase the cost of farm labour. What have we learned from the past seven years? For one thing, the system is not broken, even if optimists have been reminded that a resilient system can become volatile if perturbed sufficiently. Moreover, some of the policies proposed in response to the 2007 spike – creating world cereals reserves, putting heavy restrictions on futures trading – were unnecessary, and would have achieved little despite exacting a high cost in terms of funds and political capital. And last but not least, determined public action to raise staples production across the developing world to meet new demands has paid off. • This article was amended on 11.06.2014. "In the seven years before the spike, cereals production grew by just 9%, by 146m tonnes; in the seven years since, there has been a 16% increase, by 329m tonnes."
Yet in their calls to help the poor and reduce political turmoil by stabilizing prices, Zoellick, Sarkozy, the Brookings Institution, the G-20 agriculture ministers, and many other global leaders erred. They conflated high food prices with greater food price volatility, which is best defined as variance around the food price level. The error is understandable, because the two phenomena are indisputably correlated. If demand outstrips production, food prices rise and sellers begin tapping their food inventories. Inventory management stabilizes prices by supplementing supply in times of scarcity and boosting demand in times of surplus. But if food inventories are excessively drawn down during periods of unusually high prices, carryover stocks will be insufficient to stabilize prices during further supply or demand. This can lead to price spikes. But high food price levels and high food price volatility are not the same things. Food price levels are at historic highs, but food price volatility, although high these past few years, is not out of line with historical experience and is generally lower than it was in the 1970s. This means that the world does not necessarily face a price volatility problem. It faces a high food price problem. The effects of each phenomenon on the well-being of the poor differ. Throughout the world but especially in low-income countries, the poor are overwhelmingly net food consumers, while farmers are generally better-off net sellers. Rising prices hurt consumers by reducing their purchasing power but benefit producers by increasing their profits. By contrast, volatility does not necessarily hurt consumers, because different food staples are often substitutable. Changes in the prices of one are not perfectly correlated with changes in the price of the other, so consumers can adjust their purchases to take advantage of relative discounts. But high price volatility does hurt producers, who make all their investments in seeds, fertilizer, and equipment at the start of the growing season, before the post-harvest price is known. If prices in the year ahead look unstable, farmers may invest less than usual, with the consequence that they no longer maximize profits and also produce less food to sell. Since volatile food prices do not necessarily harm poor consumers, it does not make sense to blame volatility for increased poverty or political unrest. In a recent statistical analysis, the FAO food price index and an indicator of political unrest were positively correlated. But a measure of food price volatility and political unrest had a strong negative correlation. Although the food price spikes that occurred in the late spring and early summer of 2008, at the end of 2010, and at the beginning of 2011 coincided with political unrest, increases in food price volatility more commonly occurs after, not before, patches of political unrest. So, although commentators and politicians frequently blame food price volatility for human suffering and political unrest, they are either misunderstanding or misrepresenting the problem. Perhaps not coincidentally, their emphasis on tempering price volatility favors the same large farmers who already enjoy tremendous financial support from G-20 governments. The way in which leaders cast the food price problem matters because it shapes policy responses. Policies aimed at curbing food price volatility, such as export bans, price stabilization schemes, and subsidies for farmers are misguided if policymakers aim to increase the welfare of the poor, or avert political unrest in developing countries. Instead, policymakers should consider measures that prevent increases in food prices, such as removing barriers to international agricultural trade and increasing investment in scientific research on crop productivity improvement, soil and water conservation, and renewable energy that does not compete with food for land. Policymakers should also focus on innovative ways to reduce post-harvest losses, which run to nearly 50 percent in many low-income countries, often due to insufficient or sub-standard storage, refrigeration, and processing facilities. Such measures are the best long- and short-term policy response to high price levels. And by curbing sharp increases in food prices, they will temper price volatility as well. Expanded production, or a reduction of waste and diversion, will drive down prices and encourage the accumulation of food inventories, which will stabilize prices. Food prices pose a serious challenge to society at large. To meet that challenge, policymakers must first identify it accurately.
THE past four years have seen the worst economic crisis since the 1930s and the biggest food-price increases since the 1970s. That must surely have swollen the ranks of the poor. Wrong. The best estimates for global poverty come from the World Bank's Development Research Group, which has just updated from 2005 its figures for those living in absolute poverty (not be confused with the relative measure commonly used in rich countries). The new estimates show that in 2008, the first year of the finance-and-food crisis, both the number and share of the population living on less than $1.25 a day (at 2005 prices, the most commonly accepted poverty line) was falling in every part of the world. This was the first instance of declines across the board since the bank started collecting the figures in 1981 (see chart). The estimates for 2010 are partial but, says the bank, they show global poverty that year was half its 1990 level. The world reached the UN's “millennium development goal” of halving world poverty between 1990 and 2015 five years early. This implies that the long-term rate of poverty reduction—slightly over one percentage point a year—continued unabated in 2008-10, despite the dual crisis. A lot of the credit goes to China. Half the long-term rate of decline is attributable to that country alone, which has taken 660m people out of poverty since 1981. China also accounts for most of the extraordinary progress in East Asia, which in the early 1980s had the highest incidence of poverty in the world, with 77% of the population below $1.25 a day. In 2008 the share was just 14%. If you exclude China, the numbers are less impressive. Of the roughly 1.3 billion people living on less than $1.25 a day in 2008, 1.1 billion of them were outside China. That number barely budged between 1981 and 2008, an outcome that Martin Ravallion, the director of the bank's Development Research Group, calls “sobering”. If China accounts for the largest share of the long-term improvement, Africa has seen the largest recent turnaround. Its poverty headcount rose at every three-year interval between 1981 and 2005, the only continent where this happened. The number almost doubled from 205m in 1981 to 395m in 2005. But in 2008 it fell by 12m, or five percentage points, to 47%—the first time less than half of Africans have been below the poverty line. The number of poor people had also been rising (from much lower levels) in Latin America and in eastern Europe and Central Asia. These regions have reversed the trend since 2000. All this is good news. It reflects the long-run success of China, the impact of social programmes in Latin America and recent economic growth in Africa. It is also a result of the counter-cyclical fiscal expansions that many developing countries, notably China, embarked on in response to the 2007-08 crisis. Many economists (including some at the World Bank itself) were sceptical about these programmes, fearing they would prove inflationary, inefficient and ill-timed. In fact, the programmes helped make poor and middle-income countries more resilient. The poverty data chime with other evidence. Estimates by the Food and Agriculture Organisation that the number of hungry people soared from 875m in 2005 to 1 billion in 2009 turned out to be wrong, and were quietly dropped. Derek   Headey of the International Food Policy Research Institute has shown that despite the world food-price spike, people's assessment of their own food situation in most poor and middle-income countries was better in 2008 than it had been in 2006. Most of the progress has been concentrated among the poorest of the poor—those who make less than $1.25 a day. The bank's figures show only a small drop in the number of those who make less than $2 a day, from 2.59 billion in 1981 to 2.44 billion in 2008 (though the fall from a peak of 2.92 billion in 1999 has been more impressive). According to Mr Ravallion, poverty-reduction policies seem to help most at the very bottom. In 1981, 645m people lived on between $1.25 and $2 a day. By 2008 that number had almost doubled to 1.16 billion. Even if many of these middling poor move up, their places are often taken by those who have just escaped from absolute poverty; population growth does the rest. The poorest of the poor seem to have escaped the worst of the post-2007 downturn. But the growth in the middling poor shows there is much to be done.
Context matters Solutions are going to be different from place to place. There are no silver bullets — no one right answer for everyone (not GMOs, not agroecology). People on the ground should be able to choose the tools that work in their unique context. So what does this mean for someone interested in helping to feed the world? In the public debate, I hear farmers saying that, if the world’s going to eat, they have to drive down the price of food by producing more of it. And I hear progressives saying that we already have plenty of food, we don’t need more ag technology, all we have to do is make sure everyone gets a fair share. These guideposts I’ve set out suggest that both are wrong. Here’s why: First, while it’s true that there would be enough food to go around if everyone shared equitably, humanity has never been all that good at sharing. The idea that we could have completely equitable distribution of food is much more unrealistic than the idea that we could eliminate poverty. Second, 70 percent of the world’s poor depend, at least in part, on farming. Helping them produce more, and make a little money, is a smart strategy for addressing poverty. But third, “feeding the world” only makes sense if it’s bottom up rather than top down. It doesn’t help relieve poverty when super-efficient farmers in the U.S. outcompete poor farmers in the global south. Feeding the world is noble if it means that some of those poor farmers will become as rich as Americans and produce a lot more food on a lot less land. But it’s not at all noble if it means competing at an unfair advantage against the less fortunate. Here’s what I think we should be doing instead of repeating those talking points: Listening to poor farmers. When you listen to those farmers, and the people who work closely with them, they say they want agricultural technology (like high-yielding seeds), affordable loans, and education for their children. We should also listen when they say they’d rather do something else than farming. Even though agriculture touches most of the poor people around the world, in some places the most effective ways of helping will have nothing to do with farming. Investments in agriculture do have a good track record of improving the standard of living. Nevertheless, if the goal is to improve conditions for humans and minimize our collective impact on the environment (I argue that the two are one and the same), we’ve got to stay focused on reducing poverty instead of fixating on any one particular means of getting there. Fighting poverty is complicated, but it’s not all that complicated. We know enough to help, and even agree on a lot of it across partisan lines. Also: It’s a hell of a lot simpler than producing babies tuned for photosynthesis.
In terms of their demographic toll, the world's most recent famines – apart, perhaps, from Somalia in 2011–12 – by contrast have been ‘very small’ by historical standards. Although Malawi's president pleaded in April 2002 for aid to deal with a crisis that had put three-quarters of the population at risk, prompting United Nations (U.N.) agencies and non-governmental organizations (N.G.O.s) to set about addressing the country's ‘worst food crisis in half a century’, the eventual death toll in Malawi was miniscule. The best estimates available – those proposed by famine specialist Stephen Devereux at the University of Sussex – imply an increase of about 1 per cent above the normal rate. [7] These numbers matter because they reduce the impact – if not the veracity – of claims, common at the time, that pressure from the International Monetary Fund to reduce buffer stocks caused the famine. [8] In the case of Niger a few years later, estimates of 3.5 million people out of a population of around twelve million at imminent risk of starvation – almost invariably including 0.8 million children – were much recycled in July–August 2005. But again, as it turned out, crisis-induced excess mortality in Niger was almost certainly minimal. [9] The crisis in Niger, one of the poorest countries in the world, [10] led to a controversy about the definition of famine and the role of N.G.O.s. The crisis first came to global attention with Hilary Andersson's report from Zinder province on B.B.C.1's nine o'clock news on 20 July 2005, and attracted global attention thereafter. [11] But if famine is taken to mean ‘a shortage of food or purchasing power that leads directly to excess mortality from starvation or hunger-induced diseases’, then it is doubtful whether the Niger crisis of 2005 qualified. [12] For N.G.O.s the controversy reflected tensions between those interested in development aid and those specializing in emergency relief, with ‘the former commonly charging the latter with mobilizing disproportionate resources in a counterproductive way unable to address the deep-seated causes of primarily chronic crises’. [13] A key grievance concerned the validity of using a highly emotive but effective warning signal inappropriately: the Irish aid agency Concern Worldwide, for example, chose not to employ the description ‘famine’ at all. In Niger itself, the context of usage was primarily political: President Mamdou Tandja ‘would fly into a rage at the very mention of the word famine’. [14] Anthropologist and historian Benedetta Rossi has noted how Niger's poverty blurred the distinction between ‘emergency’ and ‘development’ as categories employed by competing N.G.O.s. In her words, ‘“chronic emergency” is perceived as an oxymoron by institutions whose approaches are predicated, alternatively, on “emergency” or “chronic poverty” rationales’. [15] The controversy prompted a Norwegian activist based in Niger to complain: As long as major institutions within the aid industry can continue [to] take credit for saving people from catastrophes that have never taken place, casting blame on those who say otherwise (often the local governments), the poor will be even poorer, as hasty relief campaigns built on untruthful events leave people and societies in lesser-known parts of the world worse off than before the intervention. There is something gone badly wrong when the world of aid – born out of a desire to help – has become an industry that in its desire for monetary growth is willing to tamper with the truth, not caring for the dignity and independence of the people whom they claim to assist. [16]
What is clear is that there is no simple macro-economic recipe for addressing hunger and malnutrition. What best practices show is that hunger hinges on cross-cutting, distributional factors which are as much about access and social inclusion as they are about economics. This is why cities and provinces can succeed in reducing hunger while a country fails, and why a country can make progress while the rest of a region continues to struggle. We must therefore understand hunger as the highly political question that it is – political in the sense that the mechanisms of participation and accountability that engage people with political processes are the very same things that provide a buffer against the social marginalisation at the heart of hunger. As Amartya Sen once remarked, "the law stands between food availability and food entitlement". What he meant is that unless we take seriously our duties towards the most marginalised and vulnerable, and the essential role of legal entitlements in ensuring that the poor have either the resources required to produce enough food for themselves or a purchasing power sufficient to procure food from the market, our efforts at increasing production will hardly change their situation. For people are hungry not because there is too little food: they are hungry because they are marginalised economically and powerless politically. Securing the right to food is therefore the only path to durably tackling hunger. The importance of improving the incomes of the poor, facilitating internal and foreign investment, and increasing agricultural yields cannot be downplayed in the hunger equation. But for genuine, sustainable progress to be made in tackling hunger and malnutrition, political processes must first be made accountable, participative, and attuned to the cross-cutting complexities of the hunger question. Only when the political process is human rights-proofed in this way can we be confident that the reinvestment in a country and its agriculture will truly benefit the poor and food insecure.
KAMPALA, Uganda—The World Food Program has started emergency airdrops of food to millions of people isolated by conflict and rainy conditions in South Sudan, the agency said on Monday, in the latest effort to address an unfolding crisis in the world's youngest nation. The WFP is conducting the daily drops out of bases in South Sudan, Uganda and Ethiopia to provide food and nutrition assistance to at least 2.9 million people in the three oil-rich states of Upper Nile, Unity and Jonglei by the end of the year, said Lydia Wamala, WFP spokeswoman in Uganda. The process is expected to continue over the next two months but could last longer as a civil war continues to ravage South Sudan, Ms. Wamala said. The current conflict, which began in December, has splintered the country along ethnic lines, pitting President Salva Kiir's Dinka community against former Vice President Riek Machar's Nuer tribesmen. Inadequate security and infrastructure in South Sudan have compelled the food agency to use Ugandan and Ethiopian airspace to reach people in dire need of food, officials said. "WFP is using land, air and water to deliver food to people who are isolated by conflict and facing intense hunger," said Alice-Martin Daihirou, the organization's country director. "While WFP's team here in Uganda is providing this critical logistical support to our colleagues in South Sudan, we are also assisting a growing number of South Sudanese refugees."
KAMPALA, Uganda—The United Nations started delivering food aid by barge to South Sudan as fears grow that the country’s civil war will lead to widespread famine early next year. The vessel transported the food Monday from Sudan by way of the Nile, an aid route that has been closed since 2011, when the Khartoum government cut off all commercial traffic on the river after South Sudan became independent. The U.N.’s World Food Program said Tuesday it expects in the next few days to ship some 21,000 metric tons of U.S.-donated food to South Sudan’s Upper Nile state, where fighting for control of the country’s only functioning oil fields is raging. The reopening of the Nile route, which follows talks between officials from both governments, was welcomed by the U.N. and other aid agencies, which have been forced to rely heavily on airplanes to ship food. Such deliveries are up to seven times as expensive as ground and water transport, the U.N.’s World Food Program said. Stephen Kearney, the agency’s acting director in South Sudan, said the opening of the Nile to aid shipments and the reduced transport costs come at a critical time.
Monsanto in India In India, small farms account for 92 percent of farms and occupy around 40 percent of all agricultural land. They form the bedrock of food production. However, there is a concerted effort to remove farmers from the land. Hundreds of thousands of farmers have taken their lives since 1997 and many more are experiencing economic distress or have left farming as a result of debt, a shift to (GM) cash crops and economic liberalisation [3]. Monsanto already controls the cotton industry in India and is increasingly shaping agri-policy and the knowledge paradigm by funding agricultural research in public universities and institutes. Its practices and colonisation of institutions have led to it being called the ‘contemporary East India Company’ [4], and regulatory bodies are now severely compromised and riddled with conflicts of interest where decision-making over GMOs are concerned [5]. In the meantime, Monsanto and the GM biotech sector forward the myth that GM food is necessary to feed the world’s burgeoning population. They are not. Aside from the review by GRAIN, the World Bank-funded International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge and Science for Development Report stated that smallholder, traditional farming (not GMOs) can deliver food security in low-income countries through sustainable agri-ecological systems [5]. The Standing Committee on Agriculture in Parliament unequivocally concluded that GM seeds and foods are dangerous to human, animal and environmental health and directed the former Government of Manmohan Singh to ban GMOs [6]. Despite such evidence and the recommendations to put a hold on open field GM trials by the Supreme Court-appointed Technical Expert Committee, the push is on within official circles to give such trials the green light. Monsanto cannot be trusted The GM biotech sector cannot be trusted. As its largest player, Monsanto is responsible for knowingly damaging people’s health and polluting the environment and is guilty of a catalogue of decades-long deceptive, duplicitous and criminal practices [7]. It has shown time and again its contempt for human life and the environment and that profit overrides any notion of service to the public, yet it continues to propagate the lie that it has humanity’s best interests at heart because its so-called GMO ‘frontier technology’ can feed the hungry millions. The sector attempts to control the ‘science’ around its products by carrying out inadequate, secretive studies of its own, placing restrictions on any independent research into its products and censoring findings that indicate the deleterious impacts of its products [8]. It has also faked data [9] and engages in attacking scientists who reach conclusions not to its liking [10,11]. It cannot demonstrate that yields are better, nutritional values are improved, health is not damaged or that harm to the environment does not occur with the adoption of GMOs. Independent studies and evidence, not inadequate industry funded or back ones, have indicated yields are often worse and herbicide use has increased [12,13,14], health is negatively impacted [15,16], soil is damaged [17] and biodiversity is undermined [18], among other things. GRAIN found that around 56 percent of Russia’s agricultural output comes from family farms which occupy less than 9 percent of arable land. Russia does not need or want GM crops, which the Russian Prime Minister has described as amounting to little more than a form of biological warfare weapon [19]. And here lies the real heart of the matter. Former US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger once said that if you control oil you control nations, but if you control food you control people. GMOs are not needed to feed the world. Science cannot justify their use. They are a weapon. In India, there is a drive to remove small/family farms, which are capable of ensuring the nation’s food security, and eventually replace them with larger biotech-controlled monoculture farms with GM crops for Western styled processed-food supermarkets and export [20]. It is no surprise that the likes of Syngenta, Monsanto and Walmart had a direct hand in drawing up the Knowledge Initiative on Agriculture, which was in turn linked to the US sanctioning the opening up of India’s nuclear power sector. Despite India not being a signatory to the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, US corporations are now actively involved in helping India develop its civil nuclear capabilities. Payback appears to come in the form of handing over the control of India’s agricultural land and food system to the US via that country’s biotech companies. GMOs and the bigger picture Russia is correct to conflate bio-terror and GMOs. The oil-rich Rockefeller family set out to control global agriculture via the petrochemical-dependent ‘green revolution’. The destruction of traditional farmer-controlled agriculture was actively supported by the US government and its Trojan horse agritech corporations under the agenda set out by Kissinger. GMOs now represent the ultimate stranglehold over food via ‘terminator’ seed technology, seed patenting and intellectual property rights.
Much of the investment in genetic engineering has been spent on crops that do very little to expand the global food supply. Globally, corn and soybeans account for about 80 percent of the land area devoted to growing genetically engineered crops, and both are overwhelmingly used for animal feed and biofuels. Most of the investment in GE crops ends up feeding cows and cars, not people. Moreover, seed companies’ investment in improving yields in already high-yielding areas does little to improve food security; it mainly helps line the pockets of seed and chemical companies, large-scale growers and producers of corn ethanol. The narrative that GE crops will help feed the world ignores the fact that hunger is mostly the result of poverty. It is true that about 70 percent of the world’s poor are farmers and that improving their crop yields could help raise them out of poverty, but what truly limits the productivity of small farmers is the lack of basic resources such as fertilizer, water and the infrastructure to transport crops to market. If Big Ag companies truly want to guarantee that poor farmers can feed themselves, the cheapest way would be to ensure that they have the right mix of fertilizers and to help with infrastructure improvements such as roads to market. In regions such as Africa, farmers can only afford a tenth of the fertilizer recommended for their crops.8 Industry supported research found that it can take more than $100 million to research and develop9 a single genetically engineered variety, money that would be better spent to address the factors that frequently limit crop yields. By comparison, it typically costs only about $1 million to develop a new variety by traditional breeding techniques.10,11 In Africa, moreover, traditional crossbreeding has so far outperformed genetic engineering in improving crops’ drought tolerance and efficiency of resource use.
Molecular biology transformed medicine, agriculture, and nearly every other scientific discipline. But it has also prompted a rancorous debate over the consequences of that knowledge. Genetically modified products have often been advertised as the best way to slow the impact of climate change, produce greater yields, provide more nutrients in food, and feed the world’s poorest people. Most of the transgenic crops on the market today, however, have been designed to meet the needs of industrial farmers and their customers in the West. Shiva and other opponents of agricultural biotechnology argue that the higher cost of patented seeds, produced by giant corporations, prevents poor farmers from sowing them in their fields. And they worry that pollen from genetically engineered crops will drift into the wild, altering plant ecosystems forever. Many people, however, raise an even more fundamental objection: crossing varieties and growing them in fields is one thing, but using a gene gun to fire a bacterium into seeds seems like a violation of the rules of life.
The question remains, what exactly are these impacts? Purveyors of transgenic products claim that GM farming boosts yields and farming incomes by saving on fossil fuels, pesticides, and labor. Another claim arising from this assumption is that GM farming represents a step toward environmental sustainability by decreasing emissions and the use of agricultural chemicals. GM advocates also maintain that these products pose no health risks to either the farmers or consumers. None of these arguments have held up over extended periods of use or in the face of independent testing. Pesticide and herbicide-resistant crops (by far the most widely used GM varieties) actually lead to an increase in pesticide and herbicide use over time horizons of as little as four years.3 Financial gains, which farmers make through increased yields, are offset by increased spending on patented seeds, fertilizer, and herbicides or pesticides, leading to a net decrease in income for all but the largest mega-farms. These higher input costs are especially damaging when small, more marginal farmers experience crop failure. Elevated levels of bankruptcy and consolidation have frequently occurred following the deployment of GM crops. Perhaps the most pervasive argument for GM crops is centered on the message that these crops are needed to “feed the world.” The underlying assumptions of this argument, however, are simply incorrect. At current levels of global production, there is enough food for every person on earth to have 3,000 calories per day.4 The problem lies with distribution, income, and food waste. GM crops can actually exacerbate hunger issues by pressuring farmers in marginal areas to grow cash crops for export or extensive processing. Farmers who make the switch to GM products usually get an initial increase in their yields, but this can be attributed to the varieties used as a base for the commercially available transgenic varieties. Furthermore, in repeated tests, conventional breeding has been just as or more successful at delivering “climate-ready” crops that incorporate drought or flood resistance. For environmental, social, and governance (ESG) focused investment strategies, agricultural biotech represents an unacceptable level of risk across a wide range of factors. The problem lies less with individual companies or products, but rather with how GM agriculture in its current iteration jeopardizes the whole agricultural system. Just as these risks are system-based, the consequences would manifest themselves by changing the very biological, economic, and social framework of food systems.
Equity markets around the world fell on Monday and U.S. oil prices tumbled 7 percent after Greece overwhelmingly voted against conditions for a rescue package and following unprecedented measures in China to staunch recent massive losses in its stock markets. Wall Street shares fell less than some had feared. The International Monetary Fund reassured investors by saying it was ready to help Greece if asked to do so. European shares fell around 2 percent, a relatively muted reaction to the Greek vote. Beijing introduced emergency measures over the weekend following a 30 percent slide in its stock market since mid-June, raising investors' concerns about the stability of the world's second-biggest economy. Wall Street investors took heart after Greece's outspoken finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, stepped down and Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras said his government was ready to return to negotiations with creditors in a bid to open shuttered banks. "After the initial knee-jerk reaction, the majority opinion is that there is still a possibility of some sort of a deal that keeps Greece in the euro zone," said Mark Luschini, chief investment strategist at Janney Montgomery Scott in Philadelphia. The Dow Jones industrial average .DJI fell 46.53 points, or 0.26 percent, to end at 17,683.58. The S&P 500 .SPX lost 8.02 points, or 0.39 percent, to 2,068.76, and the Nasdaq Composite .IXIC dropped 17.27 points, or 0.34 percent, to 4,991.94. TUESDAY SUMMIT Tsipras promised German Chancellor Angela Merkel that Greece would bring a proposal for a cash-for-reforms deal to an emergency summit of euro zone leaders on Tuesday after the surprisingly strong "No" vote in Greece's referendum Sunday. Raising the stakes on the Greek leader, the European Central Bank decided to keep a tight grip on funding to Greek banks, which have been closed for more than a week to avoid a massive outflow of money that could lead to their collapse. U.S. oil prices fell the most in three months after Greece's rejection of the debt bailout terms and after China's measures to support its stock markets. Also taking a toll on the energy market were talks between Iran and world powers to meet a July 7 deadline on a nuclear deal. That deal could release more oil into already oversupplied markets if sanctions on Iran are eased. Benchmark Brent crude LCOc1 declined 5.8 percent, down $3.51 a barrel at $56.82. U.S. light crude CLc1 was 7.17 percent lower at $52.86. "Uncertainty over Greece is bearish for oil," said Olivier Jakob, senior energy analyst at Petromatrix in Zug, Switzerland. "It adds an extra negative factor on top of the turmoil in Chinese financial markets, the recent rise in U.S. drilling rigs and a potential increase in Iranian oil supply." MSCI's all-country equities world index .MIWD00000PUS lost 1.01 percent, while its emerging markets index .MSCIEF dropped 2.13 percent. The euro zone blue-chip Euro STOXX 50 index .STOXX50E fell 2.22 percent. The pan-European FTSEurofirst 300 index .FTEU3 was down 1.17 percent. The Athens stock market remained shut, but U.S.-listed Greek shares slid. National Bank of Greece's (NBGr.AT) U.S. shares (NBG.N) closed down 12 percent in New York while the exchange-traded fund Global X FTSE Greece 20 ETF (GREK.K) fell 7.5 percent. The euro was 0.54 percent weaker against the dollar, at $1.1053 EUR=. The dollar index .DXY, a gauge of the greenback against six major currencies, edged up 0.16 percent after earlier hitting its highest point in a month. CHINESE RESCUE MEASURES Chinese stocks market climbed, going against the broader tide of declines in world markets. The CSI300 index .CSI300 of the largest listed companies in Shanghai and Shenzhen closed up 2.9 percent, while the Shanghai Composite Index .SSEC gained 2.4 percent after brokerages and fund managers vowed to buy massive amounts of stocks, helped by China's state-backed margin finance company. The rapid decline of China's previously booming stock market had become a major headache for China's top leaders, who were already struggling to avert a sharper economic slowdown. Benchmark U.S. Treasury yields hovered near their lowest levels in over two weeks as safe-haven demand boosted bond prices. Yields on 10-year Treasuries hit 2.274 percent, their lowest level in over two weeks, while long-dated yields hit their lowest level in nearly one week at 3.088 percent. (Additional reporting by Hideyuki Sano in Tokyo and Patrick Graham, by Nigel Stephenson, Lionel Laurent and Alistair Smout in London; Editing by Bernadette Baum and Leslie Adler)
The United States is on top of the world in terms of energy production, President Barack Obama said during his sixth State of the Union. "We believed we could reduce our dependence on foreign oil and protect our planet," he said during his Jan. 20 address. "And today, America is number one in oil and gas. America is number one in wind power. Every three weeks, we bring online as much solar power as we did in all of 2008." We decided to check out the data and see if in fact the United States is the world’s top oil and gas producer. As it turns out, the United States passed Saudi Arabia about two years ago in terms of oil production. And we’ve been the top producer of natural gas for more than two decades. The U.S. Energy Information Administration, which tracks global energy production and consumption statistics, generally uses total oil supply production as its most relevant statistic for assessing the world oil market. This statistic includes crude oil, natural gas liquids, condensates, other liquids, such as biofuels like ethanol, and refinery gain. By this measure, in the third quarter of 2014 -- which includes the most recent available data -- the United States produced 14.2 million barrels per day. The next-highest producer, Saudi Arabia, produced 11.7 million per day; and Russia produced 10.5 million per day. Together, that’s about 40 percent of total global production.
Oil traded near $60 a barrel as price volatility shrank to the lowest in six months amid speculation over the pace of production growth in the US. Futures were little changed in New York after capping a three-day drop on Friday. A gauge of oil volatility slid 14.7 per cent last week, the most since September 2013. The number of active US rigs drilling for crude slipped by eight to 660 through May 15, the smallest reduction in 23 weeks of declines, data from Baker Hughes shows. 　 Oil’s recovery from a six-year low is stalling near $60 a barrel amid speculation rising prices will encourage production and sustain a supply glut. US crude inventories are more than 100 million barrels above the five-year average for this time of year, according to government data. “The market seems happy to stay around this area until it sees some movement on US production,” Ric Spooner, a chief strategist at CMC Markets in Sydney, said by phone. “Time may ultimately prove to be a problem. If we don’t start to see output drop away more significantly in the coming weeks, the market may begin to get nervous about it.”
We’re swimming in oil and gas. U.S. oil and natural gas reserves soared to new heights in 2013, unleashed by unconventional drilling methods that extracted more shale oil and gas than analysts previously expected, according to an Energy Information Administration announcement Wednesday. The increase has helped force oil prices to their lowest point in four years. Oil production last year was at its highest in 31 years, the EIA said, driven by controversial hydraulic fracturing – or fracking – and horizontal drilling methods that have opened huge oil and gas deposits in the Northeast, Mid-Atlantic, Midwest and Southwest. As a result of fracking and horizontal drilling, U.S. “proved” reserves of crude oil and condensate – or oil and condensate, a type of ultralight oil, that can be recovered under existing economic conditions and with current technology – surpassed 36 billion barrels last year for the first time since 1975, the EIA said. North Dakota’s oil and condensate reserves alone exceeded those in the federally held sections of the Gulf of Mexico, and ranked second only to reserves in Texas. Overall, the rise in proved reserves of U.S. oil to 36.6 billion barrels, up 9.3 percent over 2012, marked the fifth straight annual increase in reserves. “We know there is oil,” Fadel Gheit, an analyst at Oppenheimer & Co., told Bloomberg. “We know it will exceed even the most optimistic forecasts. That’s the huge leap forward. You’re talking about potentially a 50 percent increase in proved reserves in the next three years.” Natural gas reserves also saw a sharp spike, jumping by more than 10 percent to a record 354 trillion cubic feet and reversing a sharp decline that unsettled some analysts in 2012. The expansion was fueled by exploration and production of the Marcellus Shale in Pennsylvania and West Virginia, which together accounted for 70 percent of the increase in gas reserves. Pennsylvania alone saw its gas reserves leap by 13.5 trillion cubic feet – the largest increase in the country.
The U.S. proved oil reserves still amount to just a fraction of the reserves of the world’s petroleum powers. Venezuela held the most oil reserves at 298.3 billion barrels last year, Bloomberg said, citing a report by the BP Statistical Review of World Energy. Saudi Arabia had 265.9 billion barrels, and Canada 174.3 billion. Nevertheless, U.S. oil and gas production, aided by a sluggish global economy and increasingly fuel-efficient motor vehicles, has been enough to drive oil prices down significantly.
Another part of the human problem that Dr. Kain pointed out is our tendency to shift blame away from ourselves when it comes to a number of emerging infectious disease threats, including antimicrobial resistance. We focus squarely on the microbe or virus itself, a squiggly illustration of the molecular structure plastered on magazine covers all over newsstands. Except, contrary to your average Economist headline, the bugs are not out to get us. “The microbe, once inside, is usually trying to adapt to you, at least over time. There is no evolutionary pressure for a bug to kill its host, because then it can no longer propagate its gene pool.” Moreover, focusing on the bug detracts from the responsibility we have as humans to reduce our activities that cause them to emerge in the first place and to establish living conditions and health systems that reduce the chances of transmission and spread. “We tend to demonize microbes, when in reality, many of these outbreaks have human fingerprints all over them,” he says. This phenomenon is all over our news outlets, instilling fear in the general public and even going so far as to create hostility towards West Africans.1
Ethical requirements for research demand that sponsors provide fair benefits to communities who are engaged in any research in this, or future, outbreaks.10 While there are many benefits that sponsors and communities could consider—such as making any proven interventions available to the population (“reasonable availability”) or building schools—the most pressing benefit likely is contributing to containment and strengthening local health systems and infrastructure. High-income countries are sponsoring research evaluating specific Ebola treatments and vaccines largely because Ebola is perceived as a potential national security threat. For example, the US government has already spent millions of dollars on Ebola research, partly because it regards the disease as a threat to US soldiers and aid workers, and partly because it fears development of Ebola as a bioterrorist weapon.
First, everyone has obligations of humanitarian assistance to help others in dire need if the cost or imposition is minimal.3 This idea underlies the notion of a “Good Samaritan.” Most people recognize that, if a person is walking past a shallow pond and sees a child drowning in it, that person should wade in and pull the child out—even if that means risking minor injury or being delayed. Severe moral opprobrium and social stigmatization—if not legal penalties—are appropriate if you do not rescue the child. By analogy, societies have an obligation to help people affected by Ebola when the cost or imposition of doing so is minimal. Severe morbidity and mortality from Ebola are tragic occurrences, independent of where people live and whether societies or other countries have special relationships with those affected. Effective help for Ebola is available at relatively minimal cost for high-income countries. Supportive treatment and containment measures—implementing isolation of suspected cases, infection control and universal precautions, contact tracing and monitoring, surveillance, and raising awareness in local communities and internationally—have a proven track record of controlling Ebola outbreaks. Moreover, the resources necessary for these measures are small, even trivial. So far, the World Health Organization (WHO) has pledged $100 million, the World Bank $200 million, the European Commission $181 million, and the United States $75 million to combat this outbreak.4 Even if ultimately $1.5 billion is needed, this represents less than 1 penny for every $100 of the US $16 trillion gross domestic product in 2012, and just 1 penny for every $390 of the gross domestic product of the world’s 20 largest economies. By any measure, this constitutes an insignificant imposition on citizens of high-income countries. Virtually all high-income countries are thus in a position to effectively help curb the Ebola epidemic, without sacrificing much of importance. The moral obligation of humanitarian assistance requires doing so.
In a sign that international concern about infectious diseases is attract- ing attention in military circles, the United States government has launched the Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA), a multinational effort to con- front antibiotic resistance, epidemics, bioterrorism and disease outbreaks. To kickstart the effort, the govern- ment earmarked US$40 million from the budgets of the Department of Defense (DOD) and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), with another US$45 million requested in this year's budget. "We're bringing DOD resources to the Global Health Security Agenda by leveraging the department's long history of medical and health inno- vation," Andrew C. Weber, assistant sec- retary of defense for nuclear, chemical a n d biological defens e p rograms, explained at the Feb. 13 launch. The aim is to create a worldwide "interconnected network of emergency operations centres to help manage these outbreaks," according to Laura Holgate, senior director of weapons of mass destruction terrorism and threat reduc- tion at the National Security Council in Washington, DC. Pooling funds from defence and health programs will extend the agenda's reach, Holgate said in video-recorded comments. "When you look at how we're orga- nized across our government on our vari- ous health and security strategies, you can see some common threads among them," she said. "We all face the same threats." The mixture of global health and security funding may prove problematic, however, says Ron Labonte, Canada Research Chair in Globalization and Healt h Equity at the University of Ottawa in Ontario. "It raises the question whether this is a defence or health agenda, and it is worrying that infectious diseases are being defined as a kind of terrorist threat." With the growth of antimicrobial resistance substantially rooted in phar- maceutical industry practices and inter- national trade agreements, he argues, bolstered security measures may amount to "a kind of proximate prevention, rather than structural change." S up po rt f ro m t h e D OD f o r t he GHSA indicates the Pentagon sees improving global health as a potential new mission, says J. Stephen Morrison, director of the Global Health Policy Center at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, DC. Between 2002 and 2005, DOD's share of US official development assis- tance increased from 5.6% to 21.7%, Morrison noted in a 2008 report. "There has been a shift within DOD thinking," says Morrison. "There's a broadening awareness of the legitimacy of a global health security agenda." Morrison acknowledges that military involvement inevitably creates tension. "This debate has been underway for some time. The civilian agencies don't want to see their roles usurped." Military encroachment into public health matters can be highly controver- sial, says Morrison. For example, the US used an immunization effort in the hunt for Osama Bin Laden in Pakistan in 2011. The US "must do more to seg- regate its efforts to prevent, detect and r esp on d to f ut ur e o u t br eak s f r o m counter-terror approaches," he argues. "There's always been a hesitation about health security policies. But I think that's changing. It's becoming a more constructive dialogue." Morrison notes that the US military operates an international network of lab- oratories and health surveillance and research facilities in Cambodia, Egypt, Georgia, Germany, Kenya, Peru and Thailand that are well-suited to serving the GHSA's plan to establish emergency disease operations centres in India, Kenya, Ethiopia, Tanzania and six other as-yet-unnamed nations. Canada will also contribute funding from security resources to the GHSA, according to Jean-Bruno Villeneuve, a sp ok e s p er s o n f o r Fo rei gn A ffai rs , Trade and Development Canada. "The GHSA is intended to bring together a cross-sectoral representation of health, defense, foreign affairs and agriculture ministries from participating coun- tries," he stated in an email. The Public H e al t h A g e n c y o f Ca n a d a i s a l s o "closely following GHSA develop- ments," according to Villeneuve. Canadian support for the effort will come in part from the Global Partnership Program, which earmarked $367 million in 2012 for th e Glo bal Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction. The escalation of infectious diseases to national security threat status suggests a new global health paradigm may be emerging. According to the World Eco- nomic Forum's 2014 Global Risk Report, antibiotic resistance is a risk roughly on par with terrorist attacks. A report issued by The CDC last year stated that antibiotic resistance was a complex problem and inaction could have "potentially catastrophic conse- quences." - Paul Christopher Webster, Toronto, Ont.
In much the same way that glucometers and pregnancy tests have revolutionized in-home diagnostic testing, researchers from Florida Atlantic University and collaborators have identified a new biosensing platform that could be used to remotely detect and determine treatment options for HIV, E-coli, Staphylococcus aureas and other bacteria. Using a drop of blood from a fingerprick, this novel biosensing platform provides clinically relevant specificity, sensitivity and detection of pathogens from whole blood and plasma. The thin, lightweight and flexible materials developed by these researchers can be fabricated and operated without the need for expensive infrastructure and skilled personnel, potentially solving real-world healthcare problems for both developed and developing countries. Using this technology, they also have developed a phone app that could detect bacteria and disease in the blood using images from a cellphone that could easily be analyzed from anywhere in the world. The research collaborators have published their findings in Nature's Scientific Reports in an article titled "Paper and Flexible Substrates as Materials for Biosensing Platforms to Detect Multiple Biotargets." In the article, the researchers address the limitations of current paper and flexible material-based platforms and explain how they have integrated cellulose paper and flexible polyester films as new diagnostic tools to detect bioagents in whole blood, serum and peritoneal fluid. They employed three different paper and flexible material-based platforms incorporated with electrical and optical sensing modalities. They were able to demonstrate how these new materials can be widely applied to a variety of settings including medical diagnostic and biology laboratories. Using paper and flexible substrates as materials for biosensors, Asghar and his colleagues have identified a new rapid and cost-effective way to diagnose diseases and monitor treatment in point-of-care settings. They have been able to show how their new platforms are uniquely able to isolate and detect multiple biotargets selectively, sensitively, and repeatedly from diverse biological mediums using antibodies. "There is a dire need for robust, portable, disposable and inexpensive biosensing platforms for clinical care, especially in developing countries with limited resources," said Asghar. Existing paper and flexible material-based platforms use colorimetric, fluorometric and electrochemical approaches that require complex labeling steps to amplify their signal, are very costly to fabricate and also require expensive equipment and infrastructure. "The future of diagnostics and health monitoring will have potentially cell-phone based or portable readers sipping saliva or blood and continuously monitoring human health taking it way beyond where we are with counting steps today," said Demirci, who is the corresponding author. Asghar notes that because their materials are easy to make, easy to use, and can easily and safely be disposed by burning, they provide appealing strategies for developing affordable tools that have broad applications such as drug development, food safety, environmental monitoring, veterinary medicine and diagnosing infectious diseases in developing countries. "Our paper microchip technologies can potentially have a significant impact on infectious diseases management in low- and middle-income countries where there is limited laboratory infrastructure," said Shafiee. Demirci notes that these platforms could potentially be adapted and tailored to detect other pathogens and biotargets with well-known biomarkers.
As a virus travels from person to person it evolves and, sometimes, it becomes a better and more efficient killer. But researchers still do not know if that is what happened with the Ebola virus currently circulating in west Africa. So far there is no indication that this strain is inherently more virulent or more transmissible than when Ebola appeared in other areas of Africa in the past. But that question has not been truly answered by the science. What researchers do know, thanks to new findings published today, is that the virus is not mutating particularly quickly. Despite an earlier analysis that suggested the virus currently roiling west Africa may be mutating at a rate twice as fast as in the past, this new more comprehensive snapshot of the virus implies that, fortunately, Ebola is not evolving at a rate that would automatically upend the bevy of targeted vaccines and therapies in clinical trials. Such studies of the virus’s mutation rate are essential because researchers racing to find therapies and vaccines for the virus are preparing to combat the pathogen in its current form. If the virus were to dramatically change, its alterations would mean researchers no longer had an accurate understanding of the species against which they were building an arsenal. The new findings are published in Science. For this work, researchers analyzed full-length genome sequences from several disease clusters of Ebola. They compared the genomes of several virus samples collected in Guinea in March 2014 with dozens of samples from Sierra Leone in June 2014 and newer sequences from Mali collected in October and November 2014, scouring them for overall variation. They found that there were surprisingly few differences between the genomes despite the fact that they were sampled months apart and had likely passed between many individuals. Based on current knowledge of the virus, the mutations mostly appear to be minor. Notably, the researchers calculated that the apparent mutation rate seemed to match that of earlier Ebola virus outbreaks in central Africa in years past. The new study tracked genetic changes in Ebola over a longer period in 2014 than anyone had examined previously, so it gives a fuller picture of the virus and its changes, says lead study co-author Heinz Feldmann, a virologist with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease. “We did not see the doubling in the evolution rate that we may have expected from earlier findings,” he says. In contrast, the earlier work he referenced, also published in Science, compared all the genomes of the virus that were available at the time—those sampled over several weeks in May and June 2014 in Sierra Leone and in March 2014 from Guinea. One explanation for the fewer genetic changes found in the newest work may be that certain mutations occurring in the earlier study period—a snapshot of a shorter time—disappeared as the virus continued to mutate and are now undetectable, Feldmann says. But the important public health conclusions from the newest finding, he adds, are that it’s “less likely than we thought that vaccines and treatment options will fail.” Still, it may not be the final word—more genomes of the virus sampled in 2015 from elsewhere in west Africa will provide a clearer picture of the virus’s mutations in future studies, he says. The Feldmann team finding, coupled with other new results out today in Science that detail the successes of a candidate for an Ebola vaccine tested in macaque monkeys, provide much-needed good news in the fight against the virus that has killed more than 10,000 people in the past year. Although there is no scientifically proven vaccine to prevent Ebola from sickening people, several candidate formulations are currently in the early stages of human trials. The newest results bring another potential candidate drug into view. A vaccine made from a chemically inactivated whole Ebola virus was found to be successful at preventing disease in macaque monkeys, a stand-in test subject for humans. The vaccine was also still effective at preventing disease after it was exposed to hydrogen peroxide as an additional safety precaution to ensure the inactivated virus would not be able to replicate. “Findings in nonhuman primates are always significant,” says Thomas Geisbert, a virologist in the Department of Microbiology and Immunology at The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston. Yet in a field that has quickly become crowded with candidates to combat Ebola, “it remains to be seen how it will compare with the vaccines that are already in human trials and what this other vaccine’s timeline will be,” he says.
Ebola in the U.S.: More than believe the hype? With Health Aid Organizations such as Médecins Sans Frontières (Doctors Without Borders) treating patients and assisting local health agencies in Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone, foreign aid workers have themselves become victims of the virus (US individuals Kent Brantly, Nancy Writebol; an anonymous French nurse). In each occurence, the infected individual has been rapatriated to his home country and placed under strict quarantine to follow treatment. With such heavy emphasis on non propagation protocols, the recent unearthing of an ebola infected Liberia national travelling to the U.S. (Thomas Duncan) who possibly infected up to 18 people in immediate contact, it is no surprise that national uproar is now pressuring airline companies in better monitoring foreign travellers originating from ebola infected regions. The Thomas Duncan case may push ebola scare in the U.S. to new heights but the disease remains, according to Dr. Peter Hotez, M.D. from the Sabin Vaccine Institute, an “enormous hype” where numbers are concerned. Death toll wise, the number of people who have died from Ebola during the current West Africa outbreak is comparable to the number of people who perish in drunk driving accidents in Texas over the same amount of time and about the same number that die of malaria in Africa every day. In the words of Dr. Hotez, Ebola remains “a scary but rare disease”.
WASHINGTON — There’s a potentially deadly disease afoot in America, with no known cure and terrifying consequences for those infected. Ebola? Well, yes, but another bug has had far more wide-ranging consequences. Since an outbreak began in late summer, the enterovirus has sent thousands of people, primarily children, to hospitals in 43 states and the District of Columbia. One strain, enterovirus D68, has apparently caused polio-like symptoms in some patients, leaving them unable to move their limbs. Four people who recently died tested positive for the disease, although the link between the virus and the deaths is unclear, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. You might not know all that from the news media’s reporting over the past few weeks. The enterovirus certainly hasn’t been ignored, but it’s a mere footnote compared with the oceanic volumes devoted to Ebola, a disease that has devastated parts of West Africa but has only one confirmed case diagnosed in the United States. But even when the reporting is accurate, the sheer tonnage of it raises a question about proportion and relative risk: Why is Ebola a media superstar when other diseases – say, enterovirus or the common flu – have more far-reaching and even deadlier consequences in this country? The question is a familiar one to people involved in spreading the word about public-health threats. News reporting, they say, typically underplays some risks and overplays others. Mundane behaviors – smoking, overeating – don’t rate sustained media coverage yet are linked to preventable diseases that kill tens of thousands annually. Ordinary viruses, such as the flu, take a huge toll as well but don’t rate screaming headlines. “If any or all of these issues received the levels of media coverage and public concern that Ebola was receiving, thousands of annual deaths could be prevented,” said Jay Bernhardt, the founding director of the Center for Health Communication at the University of Texas. The volume of Ebola coverage, he said, “reminds me a lot of the over-the-top coverage of serial killers or celebrity scandals in that they are far out of proportion with the risk or relevance to the general population.”
Influenza and influenza viruses are well-known popular topics to medical professionals and the general public. Influenza viruses had caused a pandemic globally during 1918 and 1919, and that influenza pandemic had taken away more than 20 million people’s lives in the world. However, in my opinion, it is unlikely that influenza viruses will again cause a pandemic on a level (both of the morbidity rate and the mortality rate) comparable to what happened in 1918 and 1919. Influenza viruses very easily reassort, recombine, and point mutate in nature due to their segmented RNA genome structures, however, unlike highly pathogenic (virulent) viruses like rabies virus, Lassa fever virus, smallpox virus, eastern equine encephalitis virus, Ebola virus, Marburg virus, and human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1); most influenza viruses (wild types and mutants) are moderately pathogenic. The case fatality rates of some highly virulent viruses and related references are listed in Table ​Table11. On November 11, 1918, the fighting of World War I was stopped, and World War I was officially ended on June 28, 1919 with the signing of the Versailles Treaty. It is estimated that around 8.5–10 million soldiers lost their lives in World War I due to battle. The war also directly caused more than 6 million civilian deaths. Millions of people suffered from hunger and malnutrition during the war. Malnutrition weakened the human immune system and made a person more vulnerable to infectious diseases like tuberculosis and influenza, therefore, hunger and malnutrition were indirectly responsible for millions of deaths in the world in that period of time. For example, about 700,000 Germans died from malnutrition-related diseases in the years of 1914–1918. During the 1918–1919 influenza pandemic, between 21 and 25 million people died of influenza worldwide. Those people were killed both directly and indirectly by influenza virus infections. Many families were too poor to buy food and coal, and to afford health care expenses when their family members were ill. Influenza virus could infect all members of a family, and this could result in no one left to feed the fires, and to prepare food for the whole family, even if they had firewood, coal, and food left in their homes. Sadly, a large number of people died of influenza virus infections along with starvation, cold, and poor living conditions (8). In recent years, while hunger and malnutrition are not major and serious problems in some developed countries anymore, they are still very difficult to overcome in many developing countries. In these less-developed countries, there were approximately 925 million people who suffered from hunger; 125 million children were underweight; and 195 million children were stunted each year (9). Nevertheless, in comparison to 1918 and 1919, currently, we have much better social and economic conditions and public health systems globally; and generally speaking, the majority of people in the world have better nutritional and educational statuses; better living and working conditions; therefore, better general health and immunity. Furthermore, in 1918 and 1919, physicians and nurses almost had nothing in their hands to help individuals who were infected by influenza viruses. Today, although we still do not have very effective, powerful, and practical anti-influenza drugs available, we at least have some improved, useful, and helpful anti-viral drugs like zanamivir, and effective, convenient anti-cold medicines like Tylenol or Advil. We do not have a universal vaccine to prevent all influenza virus infections, but we can make effective vaccines to a specific influenza virus strain in a short time. Actually, in the United States of America, the influenza classed mortality rate declined from 10.2/100,000 in the 1940s to 0.56/100,000 in the 1990s; and the classed mortality rates of 1957–1958 and 1968–1969 influenza pandemics were not remarkably different from the non-pandemic seasons (10). Because of the above reasons, we can optimistically assume that even the same strain of influenza virus, which caused pandemic in 1918 and 1919, would not be able to kill millions of people and cause a pandemic comparable to the 1918–1919 pandemic again in the future. Additionally, a significant number of viruses can cause influenza-like syndromes, such as rhinovirus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus, Coxsackie B virus, echovirus, and metapneumovirus (11, 12). Some of the above-mentioned viruses like adenovirus and mutated coronavirus could cause problems that are comparable to influenza viruses (13, 14). The World Health Organization (WHO) mistakenly raised the level of influenza pandemic alert from phase 5 to the highest phase 6 on June 11, 2009 (15). However, the truth was that most cases of H1N1 influenza A virus infections were mild, the symptomatic case fatality rate was only 0.005% in New Zealand (16); and in New York City, the case fatality rate was 0.0094–0.0147% for persons ≥65 years old, and for those of 0–17 years old, the case fatality rate was 0.0008–0.0012% (17). Some researchers argued that it should not have been called an influenza pandemic in the first place if the clinical severity was considered (15, 18–20). I believe it was unwise that we had paid too much attention to influenza viruses for the past many years. Moreover, people would be tired of the alerts made by the WHO like what had happened in the story of “The Boy Who Cried Wolf” (21), and when a real wolf – an epidemic caused by a highly pathogenic virus like Lassa fever virus, Ebola virus, Marburg virus is occurring, people in the world might not believe WHO’s new alerts anymore, and this would cause serious problems. Nature has taken its course, the bird influenza epidemic in China was limited and controlled successfully, because there were only 140 isolated laboratory confirmed cases of patients in a long period of time of 2013 (March 29, 2013–December 5, 2013), and H7N9 influenza A virus had not spread to other countries (two patients were infected in mainland China and were diagnosed in Taiwan and Hong Kong later) (22, 23). Not surprisingly, every year there would be some influenza patients and a few of them would die from the infections, as it is almost impossible to eliminate influenza viruses from the natural environment in many years. The severity of a viral infection is determined by both of the viral virulence (pathogenicity) and the host immunity. Some researchers’ opinions on H7N9 avian influenza virus were incorrect and/or inadequate. They mainly focused on influenza viruses and worried about viral mutations, viral pathogenicity, viral adaptation, and transmission. They overestimated the negative part of socio-economic factors of the present east China: overcrowded population in the epidemic region; very busy national and international transportation and travel; a large number of live poultry markets … but they underestimated the currently changed, developed, and improved positive part of socio-economic factors in China. The following factors might be used to explain why that H7N9 influenza A virus epidemic was limited and controlled in China, and only a few immunocompromised patients were killed by H7N9 influenza A virus. First, China has a relatively organized and effective public health system, there are four levels of (national, provincial, prefectural-level city, and county) centers for disease control and prevention all over China (24). Second, physicians and nurses in China were prepared and knowledgeable of influenza virus infections. Third, samples from patients with suspected influenza virus infections were collected and sent to the local and national centers for disease control and prevention promptly. H7N9 influenza A viruses were isolated and identified very quickly. Thereby, they were able to diagnose, confirm, and report three cases of H7N9 influenza patients in the early stage of the epidemic (24, 25). Fourth, health care and public health workers were protected properly. Consequently, none of the health professionals was infected by H7N9 influenza A virus in 2013. However, a surgeon died of H7N9 influenza in Shanghai, China in January of 2014 (26). Fifth, they detected H7N9 influenza A viruses from the samples of chickens, pigeons, and the environment of live poultry markets in Shanghai (27); and closed the live poultry markets of the involved epidemic region quickly. Sixth, patients were isolated and treated timely in hospitals, 74% (1251/1689) of those close contacts of H7N9 influenza patients were monitored and observed. Thus, H7N9 influenza A virus could not spread to a bigger population (24). Last but not least, we are connected to the Internet now, and it seems that our planet is much smaller today than the earlier days when we did not have the Internet, because communication and information exchange have become so fast, easy, and convenient presently. During that avian influenza epidemic, some influenza experts in the world shared/exchanged H7N9 influenza A virus information and provided professional consultations and suggestions efficiently and rapidly. All these public health routine practices and measures resulted in that H7N9 influenza epidemic being controlled and stopped in China (24). I have to point out that the cases of diagnosed H7N9 avian influenza A virus infection might only be the tip of the iceberg. Aside from one laboratory confirmed asymptotic case of H7N9 influenza A virus infection in Beijing (22), there were probably many undetected mild or asymptotic cases of influenza A H7N9 infection. The reason is that most people usually think a common cold is a very common and normal occurrence, and they don’t take flu-like illnesses seriously. In most situations, they would just stay home and take some medicines. Only those who have very severe flu-like symptoms would see doctors, and thereby be detected and diagnosed, accordingly the real case fatality rate should be much lower than the detected 32.14% (45/140, one case from Taiwan, and one case from Hong Kong) (22, 23).
The UN's chief of Ebola mission Anthony Banbury said Ebola could become airborne in a 'nightmare scenario' but leading scientists have slammed his remarks saying this has never happened and suggesting it is 'irresponsible'. Mr Banbury was speaking exclusively to the Telegraph as predictions were made that Ebola could have infected 1.4m people by January. He said the longer the virus is in humans the greater the chance it could mutate. He said the virus being spread through the air was a 'nightmare scenario' but that it 'could not be ruled out'. However leading British scientists have rounded on him saying his comments are a distraction and accused him of spreading panic. Professor Peter Piot, director of the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, and co-discoverer of the Ebola virus, said: "To suggest that Ebola could become airborne is completely irresponsible. "The way the virus is spreading is consistent with what we've seen in all previous 25 outbreaks, only transmitting through blood and bodily secretions. There is no precedent for a virus changing its mode of transmission so drastically. "Other viruses such as HIV – which transmit in the same way, have passed through millions of humans, and are known to mutate more than Ebola – have not become airborne. Making such claims is an unwelcome distraction from the urgent need to scale up the international response to the ongoing humanitarian crisis in West Africa." Dr Ben Neuman, Lecturer in Virology at University of Reading, said: “Ebola is found in the bloodstream, which is part of what makes it so difficult to transmit compared to other viruses. To become airborne, Ebola would need to fundamentally change the way it grows. That is very unlikely in my opinion. “Evolution can be unpredictable, but there is no good reason to expect that Ebola will become more dangerous with time. Severe diseases like Ebola often happen when a virus clashes with a brand new host for which it is poorly adapted. Recent experience with H1N1 swine flu shows that viruses are likely to mellow as they adapt to their new hosts. “There is no evidence that Ebola can spread via the air in the real world. Ebola can only be transmitted through the air under carefully controlled lab conditions. One clue that emphasises how different Ebola is from flu is how slow the virus is spreading. Compared to this Ebola outbreak, the H1N1 swine flu had already spread to an estimated 10,000 times as many people in its first ten months.” Dr Jeremy Farrar, Director of the Wellcome Trust, added that a sense of proportion should be kept when discussing Ebola. “The chances of Ebola becoming airborne are extremely small. I am not aware of any viral infection changing its mode of transmission. It’s important we retain a sense of proportion and not exaggerate the risks for it changing and becoming airborne," he told the Telegraph. "There is already enough fear and panic surrounding this epidemic.
Yesterday, I was on the phone with a Liberian man who survived the world's worst Ebola epidemic. I asked him to rate his fear of the virus during the height of spread in his home city, Monrovia. When he knew little about the disease, he said, he was extremely fearful, even preemptively pulling his children out of their classes before schools across the country shutdown. But as he learned more, his fears went away. "Ebola is simple," he reasoned, calmly. "Obey the rules and you won't get infected." Then he said something interesting: "The media hype on Ebola was so much that the fear of Ebola probably killed a lot of people." He was speaking from experience: his sister-in-law, who was three months pregnant, died because no one would admit her to a hospital when she was having problems with her pregnancy. Irrational fears about the virus, he believes, caused many of the doctors and nurses to walk off the job in Monrovia, and turn otherwise healthy patients like his beloved family member away. This fear, he said, was entirely whipped up by the media who focused too much on conspiracy theories and pseudoscience and not enough on educating the public about the virus. He's not the first to observe that the overwrought reactions to this virus had damaging effects. Closer to home, Dr. Craig Spencer — who became infamous for bowling with Ebola in New York — said much the same thing in a new piece in the New England Journal of Medicine. He too blames the media (and self-serving politicians) for stirring fear and hate, unnecessarily vilifying returning humanitarians like himself despite the fact that we know from science it would have been almost impossible for him to transmit the virus: After my diagnosis, the media and politicians could have educated the public about Ebola. Instead, they spent hours retracing my steps through New York and debating whether Ebola can be transmitted through a bowling ball. Little attention was devoted to the fact that the science of disease transmission and the experience in previous Ebola outbreaks suggested that it was nearly impossible for me to have transmitted the virus before I had a fever. The media sold hype with flashy headlines — "Ebola: `The ISIS of Biological Agents?'"; "Nurses in safety gear got Ebola, why wouldn't you?"; "Ebola in the air? A nightmare that could happen" — and fabricated stories about my personal life and the threat I posed to public health, abdicating their responsibility for informing public opinion and influencing public policy. We — the media and the public — need to absorb this Ebola lesson. It applies to every disease and health issue that becomes a matter of public concern. We need to emphasize reason not fear, scientific explanation not conspiracy theory, compassion not derision and hate. Peoples' lives hang in the balance.
If we could do this, this would be an incredible feat of technology, of science, and an amazing piece of evidence that would change our understanding of the Universe forever. Of course, however, you say the words “black holes” and people immediately get this catastrophic picture of something sucking in all sorts of matter, progressively eating the protons, neutrons and electrons that make up our world, and eventually destroying the entire thing. This is not possible. In fact, there are three reasons we know this is not possible. Let’s go over them one at a time. 1.) If these miniature black holes exist, the Earth has been getting hit by them for billions of years, and it’s still here. Sure, we’ve never created particles of this energy in a laboratory setting before. But at the very highest of energies — energies more than a hundred million (100,000,000) times greater than what we create at the LHC — particles smack into Earth constantly: the great cosmic rays that bombard us from all directions in space. These black holes, if they exist, would have been bombarding Earth (and all the planets) for the entire history of our Solar System, as well as the Sun, and there is absolutely no evidence that any body in our Solar System ever became a black hole or got eaten by one. But maybe, you’ll object, these objects were moving too quickly, and so they’ll simply pass through the Earth, eating too little matter to remain inside, and pass through to intergalactic space. Well, if that’s your objection, perhaps this second reason-why-this-is-impossible will help you out. 2.) If you do create a miniature black hole, they will decay, via Hawking Radiation, on ridiculously small timescales. If there are extra dimensions, it is conceivable that they could be of a specific type allowing the (again, very rare, but plausible) formation of a microscopic black hole. This black hole will have, at most, a mass equal to the energy of the proton-proton collision, or up to 13-to-14 TeV. That corresponds, via E=mc^2, to a mass of just 5 x 10^-20 grams, and most likely less. But, even if you have extra dimensions of the right scale, and of the right type, and you make this black hole, you still have a problem: it’s unstable. Due to the laws of quantum mechanics, this black hole is going to decay by a process known as Hawking radiation. For a black hole of mass 5 x 10^-20 grams, the decay time in three dimensions would be about 10^-83 seconds, which is not even enough time to exist! For physics to be meaningful, we need a time of about 10^-43 seconds or longer. Translated into black hole mass, we’d need it to be at least 0.00002 grams to have even a chance of existing. In four dimensions, however, especially if the “extra” one is large, the decay time goes all the way up to 10^-23 seconds. Oh, joy. To overcome the expected decay of this miniature black hole, you have to throw out the known laws of physics. These laws are so well-established that it’s inconceivable that they’d be wrong — it would be like waking up tomorrow and seeing the Sun rise in the West. But, for argument’s sake, let’s assume there are some new laws of physics that we haven’t conceived of yet that could make these black holes stable. So you make a black hole — a tiny one — at rest with respect to Earth’s center, and it doesn’t decay. Could it eat the Earth? And if so, how fast would that happen? This brings us to our third and final objection, and remember: we’ve already allowed you to throw out the known laws of physics twice to get to this point. 3.) You can compute the rate at which a black hole eats matter, and it’s not even close to being as small as the lifetime of our planet. We like to think of black holes as “sucking” in matter, but the truth of the matter is, they can only interact with it gravitationally. At a mass of ~5 x 10^-20 grams, that gravitational force it exerts is incredibly weak: all it can manage to do is pass into the Earth’s center and out again, hoping for a collision with an elementary particle as it does so. While the black hole’s cross-section is tiny, the cross-section of a proton (or neutron) is pretty large, and so we can assume — for the sake of argument — that every time the black hole strikes a proton or neutron, it absorbs it. Assuming it eats every proton, neutron, or electron that it comes in contact with — and also taking into account its gravity, to see what it attracts — it will eat about 66,000 protons and neutrons per second. Of course, 66,000 protons-and-neutrons is a tiny amount in terms of mass: 1.1 x 10^-25 grams. That rate-of-growth will be constant until the black hole becomes quite large; only at about one billion metric tonnes will the black hole will start to grow faster than this rate, as it takes that long for its cross-section to increase. Capturing 66,000 nucleons per second, how long will it take to get the black hole up to even one kilogram? Three trillion years, which is much longer than the lifetime of the Sun or even the age of the Universe. So even if you make a black hole, and even if the laws of physics that we know are wrong and it lives forever, it is still harmless. No matter how many of the laws of physics you throw out, revise or tweak, the Earth will still be okay. So take heart! We’re all set to probe the frontiers of physics, to increase our knowledge and understanding of the Universe, and to do it in a totally safe way. Any fears you may have concerning our planet getting eaten by a black hole are completely irrational, and now — armed with the scientific knowledge of why — you can rest easy. The world is safe. At least, from physics.
Some have expressed concerns that a "killer solar flare" could destroy earth. But scientists say those fears are unfounded because the Earth's thick atmosphere stops radiation produced by a solar flare. "Most importantly, however, there simply isn’t enough energy in the sun to send a killer fireball 93 million miles to destroy Earth," NASA said in a past statement. "Even at their worst, the sun's flares are not physically capable of destroying Earth.
In May 2012, a US Geological Survey report estimated a 6 percent chance of another Carrington event occurring in the next decade. Still, other researchers, such as NASA’s Hathaway, point out that for an event that big, the statistics are too flimsy to measure. The uncertainty rests in the relatively brief span of time in which scientists have recorded a link between sunbursts and electromagnetic fluctuations on Earth, the first being Carrington’s observations in 1859. And even then, the world knew about it only because an emerging technology went haywire. Sparks shocked telegraph operators and set fire to their paper. Electric surges created enough juice in some telegraph lines that operators were able to communicate even after disconnecting their batteries. According to newspaper accounts, the Northern Lights could be viewed as far south as the Caribbean, the result of electrically charged particles from the sun entering Earth’s atmosphere.
Yeomans' office at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., is devoted to finding near-Earth objects (which includes asteroids and comets) and plotting their positions over time. A few of the more notable asteroids NASA has placed on the "cleared" list in the past year include such high profile space rocks as the asteroid Apophis, which will swing extremely close to Earth in 2029 and return in 2036. All told, astronomers have found 90 percent of the large asteroids whose orbits bring them close to our planet. Apophis was cleared of concern last week when it made a distant flyby of Earth, which allowed astronomers to make new observations that helped complete rule out an impact threat in 2036. Previous observations had already ruled out the 2029 flyby. [See Photos of Giant Asteroid Apophis] In the near-future, as in this year, there will be other asteroids giving the Earth a close shave, said Yeomans. On Feb. 15, the 164 foot (50 meters) asteroid 2012 DA14 will pass the Earth at a range of about 17,200 miles (27,680 kilometers), well inside the orbit of geosynchronous communications satellites that fly about 22,370 miles (36,000 km) above the planet. Asteroid 2012 DA14 also poses no threat of impacting Earth during the flyby
From there, NASA researchers enlist the help of amateur astronomers for follow-up observations to determine the orbit of a newfound asteroid, paying particular attention to how close the orbit track comes to the Earth. "We observe where these objects are in the sky and project their orbits on years into the future," Yeomans said. If Yeomans and his team did see an asteroid headed for the planet, there are a few courses of action available to them. Landing a small probe on the asteroid to nudge it slightly off course could be one way, while other have suggested impacting the crater with a probe that would drastically change its orbit, he said.
These huge objects are closely monitored by NASA, offering just a little comfort that we would receive at least some warning if one decided to make an unplanned visit to our planet -- a collision that would spark a massive tsunami if it hit water or equally devastating destruction if it made contact with land. Luckily, "being classified as a PHA does not mean that an asteroid will impact the Earth," says NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in a statement accompanying the image. Though the objects won't be legitimate threats over the next hundred years, tracking them gives NASA more accurate predictions of their possible approaches and likelihood of impact in the future. Just this year, the large asteroid 1998 QE2 safely traveled past Earth, making for the closest approach the space rock and its moon will make to Earth for at least the next two centuries.
Humanity has made substantial progress in the hunt for near-Earth asteroids that could potentially pose a grave threat to the planet, NASA's chief space rock hunter said Monday (Jan. 14). Don Yeomans, head of NASA's Near-Earth Object Program, told a crowd here at the American Museum of Natural History that it is the smaller asteroids, not giant space rocks, that are difficult to spot. "It’s unlikely that we'd miss a big one," said Yeomans, who has written a new book on near-Earth asteroids "Near Earth Objects: Finding Them Before They Find Us" (Princeton University Press 2013). “It’s the small ones that sneak up on us
Today, however, Earth appears to be relatively safe. Galaxies that produce GRBs at a far higher rate than our own, such as the Large Magellanic Cloud, are currently too far from Earth to be any cause for alarm. Additionally, our Solar System’s home address in the sleepy outskirts of the Milky Way places us far away from our own galaxy’s more active, star-forming regions, areas that would be more likely to produce GRBs. Interestingly, the fact that such quiet outer regions exist within spiral galaxies like our own is entirely due to the precise value of the cosmological constant – the factor that describes our Universe’s expansion rate – that we observe. If the Universe had expanded any faster, such galaxies would not exist; any slower, and spirals would be far more compact and thus, far more energetically active.
Where stars are denser, LGRBs are more likely—the authors find that the innermost 25% of Milky Way stars are likely to see lethal LGRB events at least once per billion years. A billion years into life on Earth, we had just barely mastered photosynthesis and were still a billion years away from cell nuclei. Imagine if every time we got there, the slate was wiped clean by a GRB. We wouldn’t manage to get very far. In addition to looking at the GRB hostility in other areas of the Milky Way, the authors look at other locations in the universe. The Milky Way is isolated enough that we’re not prone to GRBs from nearby galactic neighbors, but in other spots the universe is much more densely packed. The authors posit that those dense regions are less friendly to life because of LGRBs, and that galaxies are only habitable in “in voids and filaments of the cosmic web,” which is a lovely way to put “low-density.”
Probability, in %, of at least one GRB having occurred in the past time t with enough flux to produce significant life extinction. For LGRB we show the probability without parentheses when there is a 10% metallicity bias, in parentheses when there is none. We consider three cases of the GRB fluence on Earth (10,100, and 1000  kJ/m2). An inspection of Fig. 2 reveals that maximal danger arises from ∼L∗ bursts. Lower luminosity bursts are more abundant, but their covering fraction of the Galaxy is too small. Higher luminosity bursts can destroy life in a large fraction of the Galaxy, but they are extremely rare. From the point of view of computational certainty, these results are reassuring, as the confidence in our determination of the rate of events around L∗ is good. This is also important from another point of view. Spatially, GRBs are concentrated within regions of the highest SFR [29,30]. The dominance of strong GRBs whose radius of influence is a few kpc implies that we can ignore this spatial inhomogeneity, and the approximation that the distribution of LGRBs follows the distribution of matter in the galaxy holds. We find that the probability of a LGRB, in the past 5 Gyr (giga years), with a fluence of 100  kJ/m2 on Earth to be higher than 90%, and in the last 0.5 Gyr this probability is 50%. It is somewhat surprising that this result (a 50% chance of a biospherically important event in a half Gyr) is so similar to the original calculation in Thorsett [1]. At a lower fluence, 10  kJ/m2, these probabilities are higher than 99.8% (95%) for 5 Gyr (0.5 Gyr), and thus are nearly certain. However, the chances of a truly catastrophic event with a fluence of 1000  kJ/m2 are at most 25%, thus making it unlikely. These probabilities are, of course, much larger (see Table II) if we ignore the suppression of GRBs in the Milky Way due to large metallicity.
The chances of Earth being fried by a burst are exceedingly rare. In fact, say Dr. Rob Preece, doctoral candidate J. Michael Burgess and Dr. Michael S. Briggs, Earth was actually at the center of the hit from April's big gamma ray burst, which they picked up on equipment aboard the Fermi Space Telescope that UAH and partners NASA/MSFC and the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Germany designed and tested. Yes, we took a direct hit. But the collapsing star that created the burst was so far away that it was very weak when it reached us. Stars that collapse and produce these bursts are far away, the researchers say, in portions of the universe that were created early after the Big Bang event, portions where there are a lot of lighter elements that were flung far. Closer to Earth, there are a lot of heavier elements that suppress the collapse of stars. "Our observations show that gamma ray bursts are less common in the immediate universe," said Dr. Briggs. "These bursts occur in younger galaxies," said Burgess. "We're in the oldest galaxy in our immediate universe because as you look deeper into space you are looking back into time." So any burst generated out there will come from really far away where we can detect it early, and it will be a comparative pipsqueak by the time it gets here. "As I was thinking about it, I realized that we would have ample warning," Dr. Preece said. The stars involved are huge. "They blow off winds that we can see well in advance. We would know ahead of time if one of these guys was ready to go off."
As the prospect of a permanent colony on Mars is getting closer with every new press release from the Mars One project, it probably makes sense to remember that any person who will move permanently to Mars will most likely die untimely and painful death.¶ Here are some things that are most likely to cause it (all kinds of technical problems are excluded from consideration):¶ First of all, the Mars colonists will be subjected to radiation before having set foot on the threshold of their new home. Technically, the radiation level during the trip from Earth to Mars does not exceed the capacity of the human body, but one should remember that the Sun is a huge unpredictable radioactive destructive mass.¶ Just one solar flare during the trip to Mars will send a stream of high-energy particles that will damage any shielding that can be created today. In fact, it will ‘roast’ any creature that is not protected by the planetary magnetic fields. In 2022, just a couple of years before the planned start of the expedition, the Sun will be at the peak of its 11-year cycle.¶ Then, on the surface of Mars, the colonists would have to find a way to deal with a reduced gravitational field of the planet. Since Mars has only a third of the earth’s gravity, this factor can be fatal in the long term perspective. All aspects of our biological structure – from heart rate to the strength of our bones – are related to gravity.¶ As soon as this force is removed, we begin to lose bone marrow and our heart and vestibular system start to malfunction. It is the reason why the astronauts do not stay on the ISS for longer than necessary. The effects of the so-called “space sickness” on Mars will be reduced compared to the microgravity of outer space, but in the long run they will likely lead to the terminal health problems.¶ And finally, there is a problem of self-sustaining life on the Red Planet. Since the supply missions to Mars will cost billions of dollars, they will be probably delayed if the colonists suddenly run out of something important, like the air, water or food.¶ Of course, each colony on Mars is planned as a self-sustaining system. However, just one serious crop failure will lead to the lack of oxygen, which will be produced by plants, and will raise the question of survival of the colonists.
Mars also appeals because of the evidence of water we’ve found there, especially in the soil. The trouble is that water isn’t the only substance we’ve discovered in the dirt of Mars. In 2009, scientists responsible for the Phoenix lander reported that they had discovered a statistically significant sample of perchlorate within the soil of the “polygon-patterned northern plains of the Vastitas Borealis.” If you’re left wondering what on Earth this might mean, you’re not alone. One of the investigators would later claim that his team had to look up the substance to find out what, exactly, they’d discovered. Perchlorate is, among other things, dangerous to the human body, capable of disrupting the basic functioning of the metabolic system. It interferes with our ability to absorb iodine, which is essential to the production of thyroid hormones. While most of us understand our metabolisms only well enough to declare that our own are fast or slow, they actually work through a delicate daisy chain of chemical interactions. When something disrupts a single link in this process, as perchlorate does, the changes can reverberate throughout the body, producing drastic changes in mood, appetite, temperature regulation, sleep cycles, and more. Starting in the 1950s, perchlorate was often used medically to treat hyperthyroidism. But in the 1960s, physicians linked medically prescribed potassium perchlorate to a number of deaths by aplastic anemia and severe agranulocytosis, two blood disorders. At the time, doctors decided the drug’s benefit outweighed this relatively small risk, but it ultimately fell out of favor, replaced by other antithyroid agents. Because they rarely prescribe it, physicians have performed relatively little research on acute perchlorate dosages in the past four decades. Here on Earth, perchlorate is uncommon, but it’s also not unheard of. It’s used in some rocket propellants, partially because it’s inert at low temperatures but explosive at higher ones. Because it’s highly water-soluble, it tends to wash away quickly when it finds its way into the ground, sometimes making its way into reservoirs. In Nevada, for example, industrial contaminants have left some drinking water with perchlorate concentrations averaging 1.2 parts per billion. While this is clear cause for regulatory concern, it still falls well below the maximum allowable levels that the FDA has established under the Safe Drinking Water Act, partly because most research has been inconclusive on the environmental health effects of these chemicals, even at much higher concentrations. Perchlorate sometimes appears naturally in the soils of very dry environments, such as the Atacama Desert in South America. Researchers like Alfonso Davila, a planetary scientist affiliated with the SETI Institute, study the Atacama and similar environments because they feature conditions analogous to those that we’re likely to encounter on Mars. Perchlorate accounted for somewhere between 0.4 and 0.6 percent of the Phoenix lander sample by weight. Davila explained to me that this is an amount several factors of magnitude greater than those found anywhere here on the Earth (including Nevada), on the moon, and elsewhere. This enormous concentration might have been the product of an environmental anomaly—some quirk of polar conditions, perhaps. But subsequent analysis of both data from earlier missions and later explorations has suggested that perchlorate is widely distributed across the planet in equivalent or greater concentrations. Indeed, as Chris McKay, of NASA’s Ames Research Center, told me, it may constitute as much as 1 percent of the soil’s weight in some places.
Each lander that Mars One sends will be able to carry about 5,511 pounds of "useful load" to Mars, he said. After eight missions, more than 44,000 pounds of supplies and people are expected to have arrived. The capsules themselves, whose weight is not included in that number, will become part of the habitat. Food and solar panels will go in the capsules. Earth won't be sending much water or oxygen though -- those will be manufactured on Mars, Lansdorp said. Astronauts will filter Martian water from the Martian soil. "We will evaporate it and condense it back into its liquid state," he said. "From the water we can make hydrogen and oxygen, and we will use the oxygen for a breathing atmosphere inside the habitat. This will be prepared by the rovers autonomously before the humans arrive." It sounds like terraforming, a process in which the conditions of a planet are modified to make it habitable, but Lansdorp said it isn't. "We will create an atmosphere that looks like the atmosphere on Earth, so you could say that we are terraforming the habitat. But to terraform the entire planet, that's a project that will take hundreds and hundreds of years," he added. A dangerous mission In spite of the risks of space travel, the Mars One founder said he is convinced of the viability of the project. However, some space travel experts have said the risks are far too high to carry out these manned missions to Mars, a distance that humans have never traveled. Radiation is a big concern. NASA does not allow their astronauts to expose themselves to radiation levels that could increase their risk of developing cancer by more than 3%. To maintain the radiation exposure standards that NASA requires, the maximum time an astronaut can spend in space "is anywhere from about 300 days to about 360 days for the solar minimum activity. For solar maximum, in ranges anywhere from about 275 days to 500 days," said Eddie Semones, NASA spaceflight radiation officer. A round-trip journey to Mars could expose astronauts to the maximum amount of radiation allowed in a career under current NASA standards, according to a recent study by scientists at the space agency. Mars One is planning a one-way journey, which doesn't negate the problem, and being on Mars could expose astronauts to even more radiation, depending on how long they stay and what the shielding conditions are like. Radiation damages cells' DNA, which can lead to cell death or permanent changes that may result in cancer. However, "there's no convincing human evidence for excess abnormalities in offspring of radiation-exposed adults," Semones said. While orbiting the Earth, astronauts get exposed to greater concentrations of cosmic background radiation than here on Earth in addition to charged particles trapped in the upper atmosphere and from the sun, said Robert J. Reynolds, epidemiologist at the University of Texas Health Science Center. As a spacecraft moves into deep space, the people on board would be exposed to even more cosmic radiation and solar particles, which is "fairly dangerous," Reynolds said. Interestingly, according to Reynolds, astronauts' risk of dying of cancer is lower than that of the general public because they tend to be in shape, eat well, don't smoke and receive careful monitoring from doctors. Of course, none of them have been to Mars. Semones emphasized that NASA does not study the health effects of Mars colonization and that it's focusing on shorter recognition missions of the surface of Mars. "We're not looking at colonization of Mars or anything. We're not focusing our research on those kinds of questions." Can it be done? Mars One isn't the only group hoping to make history by sending people to the red planet. The Inspiration Mars Foundation wants to launch two people -- a man and a woman -- on a 501-day, round-trip journey to Mars and back in 2018 without ever touching down. 501 days in space with your spouse: Could you handle it? At this time there is no technology that can protect astronauts from an excess of space radiation. "The maximum number of days to stay with our standards is on the order of 500 days. So any mission that would exceed 500 days would not be doable," Semones said. Reynolds agreed: "At this point it's completely infeasible to try to send someone to Mars unless we can get there faster or we develop better shielding for a spacecraft." NASA is working on engines intended to cut the travel time to Mars by the 2030s, but those systems won't be ready for many years, Chris Moore, NASA's deputy director of advanced exploration systems, told CNN this year. In the meantime, Moore said engineers could try to limit travelers' exposures by designing a spacecraft in such a way that it provides more protection. But Mars One founder Lansdorp insisted his group will get people landing on Mars by 2023. "The risks of space travel in general are already very high, so radiation is really not our biggest concern," he said. If that all sounds good, you can still sign up. But remember: You can never go home again.
Even though it's the closest planet to Earth for sustaining life, Mars is currently uninhabitable by humans. Yes, it has an atmosphere, wind, clouds and days are similar in length to ours at 24 hour, 37 minutes. Mars even has seasonal changes too [source: Britannica].¶ But that's essentially where the comparisons stop. By all accounts, Mars is a geologically dead planet. While Mars has plenty of volcanoes and geological evidence that there was tectonic activity at some point in its history, that's not the case anymore. There is no air pressure to hold in water and Mars suffers from the lack of a magnetic field that would shield it from harmful solar winds [source: Fox]. Any effort to process Mars into a livable planet (i.e. terraform) would have to take all these factors into account.¶ Perhaps it would be possible to jumpstart the atmosphere by turning the carbon dioxide-rich air into oxygen much the way plants on Earth clean our air. But Mars still wouldn't have a magnetic field. Without a magnetic shield for protection, extreme waves of solar radiation strip away the Martian atmosphere, thus subjecting humans to lethal doses of radiation. Evidence suggests the polar ice caps have the remnants of a magnetic shield and are safe from the extreme solar radiation [source: Fox]. If nothing else, terraforming could be limited to those regions.
Currently, the American space agency is planning to put a human on Mars in 2035 – a plan that depends on the successful completion of a few different missions, as well as stable funding over the course of the next couple of decades. As RT reported earlier this month, a new study by the US National Research Council found that under NASA’s current budget trajectory, reaching the Red Planet would be unlikely.¶ “Absent a very fundamental change in the nation’s way of doing business, it is not realistic to believe that we can achieve the consensus goal of reaching Mars,” said Mitch Daniels, the former Indiana governor and co-chair of the National Research Council (NRC) Committee on Human Spaceflight.
NASA will need more money¶ Without a significant boost in the space agency’s budget, we should forget about Mars, says the panel. Sending humans to the Red Planet will cost on the order of hundreds of billions of dollars, and even though this will be amortized over decades, the nation should be prepared to pay that cost. Americans should also understand that people will likely die carrying out such an ambitious mission.¶ Spaceflight is popular, but only up to a point¶ This wasn’t the typical committee of ex-NASA officials and aerospace engineers, repeating the same tired arguments. The panel included historians, economists (co-chair Mitch Daniels is a former head of the U.S. government budget office), and in Roger Tourangeau, one of the leading academic experts on public opinion. As a result, their analysis of public support for spaceflight goes far beyond counting Twitter followers and Facebook likes, or relying on quickie polls to show that people “like space.” Basically, Americans want a human spaceflight program, but it’s far from a priority. “At any given time, a relatively small proportion of the U.S. public pays close attention to space exploration,” the committee wrote. Furthermore, “most Americans do not favor increased spending on space exploration”—which seems a serious problem, given the need to increase NASA’s budget. But, said Daniels in a press briefing timed for the report’s release, this may not be a showstopper. If the public won’t demand more spending, neither is it likely to object if leaders invest more in space, especially if NASA can show tangible results.¶ The United States can’t go it alone¶ If NASA aims to send people to Mars, the program will have to be international, and other nations will have to contribute well above the amounts they’ve historically invested in human spaceflight. China should be included.¶ NASA needs an overhaul¶ NASA facilities that are obsolete or don’t contribute to the mission should be closed. (This, of course, requires wise management by Congress, whose political patronage sometimes keeps NASA programs alive beyond the point of usefulness.)¶ If the report’s conclusions sound blunt, they’re meant to. As Daniels told reporters, “We recognize that many of our recommendations will be seen by many as unrealistic—to which we would only observe that, absent changes along the lines we are recommending, the goal of reaching Mars in any meaningful timeframe is itself unrealistic.”
It will take unprecedented unity, funding and international teamwork to land astronauts on Mars within the next 30 years, the co-chairmen of an independent government panel advocating such a mission told a congressional committee Wednesday.¶ Then the two co-chairmen got a glimpse of why those goals won’t come easy:¶ • GOP lawmakers at Wednesday’s hearing bashed the Obama administration for abandoning a return-to-the-moon mission in favor of using an asteroid as a steppingstone to Mars.¶ • Democrats said Republicans have no right to complain about lack of money for the space program when they’ve pushed for budget cuts.¶ • And lawmakers from both parties raised doubts about whether potential foreign partners, notably China, can be trusted.¶ Mitch Daniels, co-chairman of the National Research Council panel that issued the 285-page report earlier this month, acknowledged the enormousness of the task.¶ “Getting humans to the surface of Mars will be a daunting challenge,” Daniels, now president of Purdue University and a former two-term Indiana governor, told members of the House Science, Space and Technology Committee. “Succeeding in this endeavor will require, we believe, a very different way of doing business than the nation has been practicing in recent decades.”¶ The other co-chairman, Jonathan Lunine, who directs Cornell University’s Center for Radiophysics and Space Research, told lawmakers that a Mars mission will cost “hundreds of billions” over the next two to three decades and may not be an easy sell to the public.¶ The National Research Council’s report concludes that exploring Mars — a concept that the committee backs — will require a plan that enjoys almost total support, full funding, and involvement by private and international partners from the get-go.
Extended exposure to cosmic radiation damages DNA, and might cause cancer or other negative health effects. Earth’s atmosphere and/or magnetic field prevent these problems near Earth’s surface. Cosmic radiation could also damage electronic equipment.[29]
Mutation is ultimate source of new variations, such as coarser hair, or darker skin than one’s fellows. In common speech a mutation is thought of as being deleterious, but scientifically speaking mutations could be advantageous, disadvantageous or neutral. Some mutation is a result of radiation, and interstellar voyage designs will have to consider trapped particles, radiation energy near Earth and constrained within the Van Allen belt (and presumably about other planets with analogs of the Van Allen belt; cosmic rays derived from many sources outside this region, and solar radiation blasts out of suns. Radiation can degrade biological tissues and cell functions, and it can also be a powerful mutagen, altering DNA; recently it has been suggested that cosmic radiation could increase the incidence of brain disorders.
1.2.4. Exploration Beyond the Solar System At the present time, four spacecraft are on the way to leave the solar system (Figure 46.4). These are Pioneer 10 and 11, launched to explore the outer solar system in 1972 and 1973, respectively, and Voyager 1 and 2, both launched in 1977 to take advantage of a favorable alignment of the planets. Voyager 1 presently travels through the heliosheath, which separates the solar system from interstellar space. In 2022, Voyager 1 will pass the heliopause and become the first man-made object to leave the solar system. In contrast to the Pioneer spacecraft, both Voyager probes are still partly operational and transmit data about electric and magnetic fields, solar wind, and hydrogen distribution. Traveling at a speed of 17 km/s after four gravity assist maneuvers it will take Voyager 1 about 50 years to leave the solar system. This is an indication of the enormous distances and flight times inherent in interstellar travel. A trip to the closest star Proxima Centauri at this speed would take roughly 75,000 years. Obviously, exploration beyond the solar system requires major progress in propulsion. Novel systems including nuclear energy and continuous propulsion through, for example, electric drives will be necessary. Interstellar spaceships carrying crew are out of scope with present day technology. The problems are not only propulsion, but include the life support, which has to operate with a closed cycle, radiation protection, reliability of all systems and subsystems, and not the least the psychological problems inherent in such ventures. On the other hand, science discovers at a rapid rate extrasolar planets. Very likely planets with conditions similar to our home planet will be found, and some of them maybe in nearby stellar systems. It will be just a matter of time to develop technology to explore those potential future habitats for humans.
When travelling at a few percent of the speed of light, collisions with interstellar matter could cause significant damage to a vessel. Like radiation, this is something that might be overcome with appropriate shielding, though there are trade-offs between mass from shielding and the amount of energy necessary for propulsion. The other people I spoke with about this issue also believed that this challenge could be overcome with appropriate shielding.[35] However, in his brief critique of the feasibility of interstellar missions, Ed Regis claimed that “a high-speed collision with something as small as a grain of salt would be like encountering an H-bomb,” suggesting he did not find it clear that this challenge could be overcome.[36]Some simple calculations, however, suggest that Regis’s claim could only be realistic under very extreme assumptions. Assuming that 100% of the kinetic energy of the salt grain were converted to an explosion, a one-milligram mass could only produce a one-megaton explosion if the spacecraft were travelling at extremely close to light speed. At 10% of light speed the impact would be equivalent to about 100 kg of TNT, which is about 10 million times smaller. At 1% of light speed, the impact would be equivalent to about 1 kg of TNT.[37] These smaller explosions would not be negligible, but would probably be within the range of explosions that some bunkers and armored vehicles are capable of withstanding today.
On the opposing side, something that could gather the energy necessary for interstellar travel might be weaponized, and this could—imaginably—create political opposition to interstellar travel.[55] Some further relevant notes from my conversation with Stross: “However, other ideological perspectives—such as perspectives emphasizing the sacredness of nature—might oppose space colonization. Opposition from these perspectives could prevent an optimistic minority from colonizing space even if it were feasible.”
A mass exodus from Earth is implausible. After all, it costs $50 billion just to send a dozen people to the Moon for a few days. Elon Musk may claim he’ll reduce the price of a trip to Mars to $500,000, which is a hundred thousand times less, but that seems unlikely at the moment. If the Earth becomes contaminated or inhospitable, we’ll have to live in bubble domes, fix it, or suffer through it. Nonetheless, in this century a first cohort of adventurous humans will probably cut the umbilical and live off-Earth. What issues will they face? Beyond survival, their first issue is their legal status. As we’ve seen, the 1967 Outer Space Treaty addresses ownership. According to Article II, “Outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, is not subject to national appropriation by claim of sovereignty, by means of use or occupation, or by any other means.” That seems transparent, but it doesn’t mention the rights of individuals. Bas Lansdorp, the CEO of Mars One, said his legal experts looked into the treaty. He thinks that “what goes for governments also goes for individuals in those governments.” If Mars One achieves its goal, thirty people will settle the red planet by 2023; the gradually expanding settlement will use more and more Martian land. Lansdorp insists that their goal isn’t ownership. “It is allowed to use land, just not to say that you own it,” he says. “It is also allowed to use resources that you need for your mission. Don’t forget that a lot of these rules were made long ago, when a human mission to Mars was not within reach.”
Proxima Centuari—the closest star outside our solar system—is 4.2 light years away.[12] Currently, Voyager 1 is moving away from the sun at 17 km/s, faster than any other human-made object.[13] At its current speed, it would take over 70,000 years to reach travel that distance (though it isn’t going in that direction).[14] The voyage would take decades even at a significant fraction of the speed of light. The longer the trip, the harder it is to ensure that all critical parts of the system (including passengers or descendants of passengers) survive the journey. These issues are discussed in the next sections. This section will focus on propulsion methods and energy requirements. Charles Stross estimated that it would take at least 1018 Joules of energy to accelerate a 2000 kg spacecraft to 10% of the speed of light, and an equal amount to slow it down—making generous assumptions such as 100% efficient energy conversion and no reaction mass. This was equivalent to five days of human civilization’s total electrical energy production in 2007,[15] or about one day of civilization’s whole energy production.[16]
The human body is adapted to the level of gravitational force normally experienced on the surface of the Earth, and extended exposure to a zero-g environment has various adverse health effects, including loss of bone and muscle mass, retinal damage, redistribution of bodily fluids toward the upper half of the body, balance disorders, and loss of taste and smell.[24] According to Wikipedia, we have very limited knowledge about the potential effects on the very young and the elderly.[25] In addition, attempts to breed mice and fish eggs in space have come out badly, and the prevailing view is that microgravity is the source of the problem.[26] This may be a problem because—given the distance to other stars—human reproduction may be necessary in transit.
Tracking Debris The Department of Defense maintains a highly accurate satellite catalog on objects in Earth orbit that are larger than a softball. NASA and the DoD cooperate and share responsibilities for characterizing the satellite (including orbital debris) environment. DoD’s Space Surveillance Network tracks discrete objects as small as 2 inches (5 centimeters) in diameter in low Earth orbit and about 1 yard (1 meter) in geosynchronous orbit. Currently, about 15,000 officially cataloged objects are still in orbit. The total number of tracked objects exceeds 21,000. Using special ground-based sensors and inspections of returned satellite surfaces, NASA statistically determines the extent of the population for objects less than 4 inches (10 centimeters) in diameter. Collision risks are divided into three categories depending upon size of threat. For objects 4 inches (10 centimeters) and larger, conjunction assessments and collision avoidance maneuvers are effective in countering objects which can be tracked by the Space Surveillance Network. Objects smaller than this usually are too small to track and too large to shield against. Debris shields can be effective in withstanding impacts of particles smaller than half an inch (1 centimeter). Planning for and Reacting to Debris NASA has a set of long-standing guidelines that are used to assess whether the threat of such a close pass is sufficient to warrant evasive action or other precautions to ensure the safety of the crew. These guidelines essentially draw an imaginary box, known as the “pizza box" because of its flat, rectangular shape, around the space vehicle. This box is about a mile deep by 30 miles across by 30 miles long (1.5 x 50 x 50 kilometers), with the vehicle in the center. When predictions indicate that the debris will pass close enough for concern and the quality of the tracking data is deemed sufficiently accurate, Mission Control centers in Houston and Moscow work together to develop a prudent course of action. Sometimes these encounters are known well in advance and there is time to move the station slightly, known as a “debris avoidance maneuver” to keep the debris outside of the box. Other times, the tracking data isn’t precise enough to warrant such a maneuver or the close pass isn’t identified in time to make the maneuver. In those cases, the control centers may agree that the best course of action is to move the crew into the Soyuz spacecraft that are used to transport humans to and from the station. This allows enough time to isolate those spaceships from the station by closing hatches in the event of a damaging collision. The crew would be able to leave the station if the collision caused a loss of pressure in the life-supporting module or damaged critical components. The Soyuz act as lifeboats for crew members in the event of an emergency. Mission Control also has the option of taking additional precautions, such as closing hatches between some of the station’s modules, if the likelihood of a collision is great enough. Maneuvering Spacecraft to Avoid Orbital Debris NASA has a set of long-standing guidelines that are used to assess whether the threat of a close approach of orbital debris to a spacecraft is sufficient to warrant evasive action or precautions to ensure the safety of the crew. Debris avoidance maneuvers are planned when the probability of collision from a conjunction reaches limits set in the space shuttle and space station flight rules. If the probability of collision is greater than 1 in 100,000, a maneuver will be conducted if it will not result in significant impact to mission objectives. If it is greater than 1 in 10,000, a maneuver will be conducted unless it will result in additional risk to the crew. Debris avoidance maneuvers are usually small and occur from one to several hours before the time of the conjunction. Debris avoidance maneuvers with the shuttle can be planned and executed in a matter of hours. Such maneuvers with the space station require about 30 hours to plan and execute mainly due to the need to use the station’s Russian thrusters, or the propulsion systems on one of the docked Russian or European spacecraft. Several collision avoidance maneuvers with the shuttle and the station have been conducted during the past 10 years
The e.Deorbit mission came through ESA’s Clean Space initiative, tasked with reducing the environmental impact of the space industry in both the terrestrial and orbital realms. Space debris levels are increasing relentlessly, as colliding objects bequeath more debris and further collisions. Conserving the heavily trafficked and valuable low orbits calls for removing the large objects at a high risk of collision. e.Deorbit would target an ESA derelict in this region, capture it, then safely burn up both the satellite and itself through a controlled atmospheric reentry. Distribution of debris objects larger than 10 centimetres in space Distribution of debris Having proved this approach, multiple missions per year could be flown – and e.Deorbit is being designed with recurring flights in mind
Now, a team of scientists from Japan’s Riken research institute have come up with an ambitious plan to eliminate the debris. In a paper published in the latest issue of the journal Acta Astronautica, the researchers proposed a method that basically involves blasting an estimated 3,000 tons of debris through a fiber optic laser mounted on the ISS. This, the researchers claimed, would be a two-step process. Firstly, the researchers plan to use the existing infrared telescope of the European Space Agency’s Extreme Universe Space Observatory (EUSO) -- originally built to detect high-energy cosmic rays bombarding Earth -- to track the space junk. The second part of their proposed plan involves using a fiber-based laser system to shoot the objects until they are knocked out of their orbit and destroyed during re-entry into Earth’s atmosphere. “The new method combining these two instruments will be capable of tracking down and deorbiting the most dangerous space debris, around the size of one centimeter. The intense laser beam focused on the debris will produce high-velocity plasma ablation, and the reaction force will reduce its orbital velocity, leading to its reentry into the earth's atmosphere,” the researchers said in a statement on Friday.
So far, governments have dealt with the orbital debris through mitigation: limiting the amount of new debris created. Guidelines developed in the US and widely adopted in other countries outline steps satellite and launch operators can take to reduce the creation of new debris, such as venting propellant tanks and discharging batteries to avoid on-orbit explosions that create large amounts of debris.
Currently, many leading space companies are developing space debris removal systems. These systems can conditionally be divided into two types: passive and active ones. Passive systems are mounted onto objects that have to be deorbited in advance, and are activated after their mission’s complete. These systems can use different physics for deorbitation. The Yuzhnoye State Design Office proposes devices the operation principle of which lies in augmentation of their aerodynamic drag force by creating a large surface area due to inflation/deployment of special structures. Active systems represent autonomous spacecraft able to deorbit space debris objects and/or remove them to special graveyard orbits. ACTIVE SYSTEMS LEOSWEEP PROJECT Currently, the Yuzhnoye State Design Office in cooperation with other Ukrainian organizations is taking part in an international project LEOSWEEP, which is partially funded by the European Union within the 7th Framework Program.
Studies show that the number of debris in low Earth orbit is exponentially growing despite future debris release mitigation measures considered. Specifically, the already existing population of small and medium debris (between 1 cm and several dozens of cm) is today a concrete threat to operational satellites. A ground-based laser solution which can remove, at low expense and in a nondestructive way, hazardous debris around selected space assets appears as a highly promising answer. This solution is studied within the framework of the CLEANSPACE project which is part of the FP7 space program. The overall CLEANSPACE objective is: to propose an efficient and affordable global system architecture, to tackle safety regulation aspects, political implications and future collaborations, to develop affordable technological bricks, and to establish a roadmap for the development and the future implantation of a fully functional laser protection system. This paper will present the main conclusions of the CLEANSPACE project.
Not surprisingly, the courts have not been impressed by such legal gymnastics. Where plaintiffs have claimed they do not have to pay federal taxes as organic sovereigns, the "argument has been consistently and thoroughly rejected by every branch of the government for decades. Indeed, advancement of such utterly meritless arguments is now the basis for serious sanctions imposed on civil litigants who raise them." United States v. Studley, 783 F.2d 934 (9th Cir. 1986). The fact that the United States Supreme Court has soundly rejected attacks on the Fourteenth Amendment for more than a century adds to the Amendment's legitimacy. See Leser v. Garnett, 258 U.S. 130 (1922). Courts adhere to the concept of stare decisis, a doctrine designed to create a secure and certain legal system by requiring courts to "abide by, or adhere to, decided cases." Black's Law Dictionary (6th ed.). If this doctrine means anything, it means that, after more than a century of Supreme Court acceptance, the validity of the Fourteenth Amendment and its ratification process is no longer subject to challenge. The Fourteenth Amendment was championed by a victorious government as the result of the Civil War. Questioning the Amendment at this late date is tantamount to fighting the war all over again. Having lost on the battlefield, it is no surprise that those who question the Amendment's legitimacy have lost in the courts.
The very first lines of the 14th amendment to the United States Constitution read, "All persons born or naturalized in the United States and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside." This simple sentence has sparked a debate over the possible solutions and complications surrounding one of America's most controversial issues: illegal immigration. The 14th amendment, which introduces birthright citizenship, has encouraged some illegal immigrants to try to have children in the United States, which has created a host of problems for our nation. ]Illegal immigration is an issue that has plagued our nation for too long; it has created racist barriers, driven states into debt and caused Americans to contradict the very principles their country was founded upon. The catalyst for this ongoing problem has been abuse of the 14th amendment, which guarantees birthright citizenship. The 14th amendment, which was established after the civil war to provide equal rights to former slaves, has exacerbated the problem of illegal immigration because it established the idea of "birth right" citizenship, a concept that created a myriad of problems regarding illegal immigration in the United States. The most obvious problem with birthright citizenship is that it encourages illegal immigrants to try to have children in the United States. Immigrants know that their children will be granted full United States citizenship if born on American soil, and therefore will have access to welfare and other state social programs. These babies, called "anchor babies," help illegal alien parents escape deportation, and are being subsidized with taxpayer money. Although these parents are not offered citizenship, they do have a chance to live with their American born children until they reach the age of 21, after which they are at risk of deportation. This lose-lose situation costs money to maintain, and is immoral because families can be split up after the children reach adult age. The costs involved with illegal immigration grow every year and will continue to escalate if the interpretation of the 14th amendment is not altered. The Federation for American Immigration Reform estimates that the births of children of illegal aliens costs nearly $6 billion, which are funded mainly through Medicaid programs, federal money and American taxpayers. In addition to the costs of their births, these "anchor babies" will drain an estimated $5 billion for education, including bilingual studies and special needs. According to the California Department of Social Services, California, which has a high concentration of illegal immigrants, pays an estimated $553 million for welfare to support this group.
To turn now to substantive aspects of the question, the first irregularity-the passage of the amendment by an incomplete Congress-can be disposed of rather briefly. The final vote in the House of Representatives was 120 to 32, with 32 abstentions-far more than the requisite two-thirds majority. But the eleven states of the erstwhile Confederacy were entitled to and had elected 61 representatives who had been denied seats, all of whom would doubtless have voted in the negative. Had their votes been cast, the majority would have been only 56 percent. Besides, the majority included representatives from the newly admitted states of West Virginia and Nevada, the constitutionality of whose statehood was doubtful. In the Senate a similar situation pertained. The vote there was 33 to 11, with 5 abstentions. If the twenty-two seats of the former Confederate states were added in the negative column, there would have been a tie vote, and if the four seats held by West Virginia and Nevada were subtracted from the affirmative column, the aye votes would have fallen short of even a simple majority.
Today 37 states and Washington, D.C., offer marriage licenses to same-sex couples. Is it a coincidence that scores of bills have erupted in state legislatures in the name of "religious liberty," from those who oppose same-sex marriage?
Feminism is not dead. It is alive and well in intercollegiate debate. Increasingly, students rely on feminist authors to inform their analysis of resolutions. While I applaud these initial efforts to explore feminist thought, I am concerned that such arguments only exemplify the general absence of sound causal reasoning in debate rounds. Poor causal reasoning results from a debate practice that privileges empirical proof over rhetorical proof, fostering ignorance of the subject matter being debated. To illustrate my point, I claim that debate arguments about feminists suffer from a reductionism that tends to marginalize the voices of significant feminist authors. David Zarefsky made a persuasive case for the value of causal reasoning in intercollegiate debate as far back as 1979. He argued that causal arguments are desirable for four reasons. First, causal analysis increases the control of the arguer over events by promoting understanding of them. Second, the use of causal reasoning increases rigor of analysis and fairness in the decision-making process. Third, causal arguments promote understanding of the philosophical paradox that presumably good people tolerate the existence of evil. Finally, causal reasoning supplies good reasons for “commitments to policy choices or to systems of belief which transcend whim, caprice, or the non-reflexive “claims of immediacy” (117-9). Rhetorical proof plays an important role in the analysis of causal relationships. This is true despite the common assumption that the identification of cause and effect relies solely upon empirical investigation. For Zarefsky, there are three types of causal reasoning. The first type of causal reasoning describes the application of a covering law to account for physical or material conditions that cause a resulting event This type of causal reasoning requires empirical proof prominent in scientific investigation. A second type of causal reasoning requires the assignment of responsibility. Responsible human beings as agents cause certain events to happen; that is, causation resides in human beings (107-08). A third type of causal claim explains the existence of a causal relationship. It functions “to provide reasons to justify a belief that a causal connection exists” (108). The second and third types of causal arguments rely on rhetorical proof, the provision of “good reasons” to substantiate arguments about human responsibility or explanations for the existence of a causal relationship (108). I contend that the practice of intercollegiate debate privileges the first type of causal analysis. It reduces questions of human motivation and explanation to a level of empiricism appropriate only for causal questions concerning physical or material conditions. Arguments about feminism clearly illustrate this phenomenon. Substantive debates about feminism usually take one of two forms. First, on the affirmative, debaters argue that some aspect of the resolution is a manifestation of patriarchy. For example, given the spring 1992 resolution, “[rjesolved: That advertising degrades the quality of life,” many affirmatives argued that the portrayal of women as beautiful objects for men’s consumption is a manifestation of patriarchy that results in tangible harms to women such as rising rates of eating disorders. The fall 1992 topic, “(rjesolved: That the welfare system exacerbates the problems of the urban poor in the United States,” also had its share of patri- archy cases. Affirmatives typically argued that women’s dependence upon a patriarchal welfare system results in increasing rates of women’s poverty. In addition to these concrete harms to individual women, most affirmatives on both topics, desiring “big impacts,” argued that the effects of patriarchy include nightmarish totalitarianism and/or nuclear annihilation. On the negative, many debaters countered with arguments that the some aspect of the resolution in some way sustains or energizes the feminist movement in resistance to patriarchal harms. For example, some negatives argued that sexist advertising provides an impetus for the reinvigoration of the feminist movement and/or feminist consciousness, ultimately solving the threat of patriarchal nuclear annihilation. likewise, debaters negating the welfare topic argued that the state of the welfare system is the key issue around which the feminist movement is mobilizing or that the consequence of the welfare system – breakup of the patriarchal nuclear family -undermines patriarchy as a whole. Such arguments seem to have two assumptions in common. First, there is a single feminism. As a result, feminists are transformed into feminism. Debaters speak of feminism as a single, monolithic, theoretical and pragmatic entity and feminists as women with identical motivations, methods, and goals. Second, these arguments assume that patriarchy is the single or root cause of all forms of oppression. Patriarchy not only is responsible for sexism and the consequent oppression of women, it also is the cause of totalitarianism, environmental degradation, nuclear war, racism, and capitalist exploitation. These reductionist arguments reflect an unwillingness to debate about the complexities of human motivation and explanation. They betray a reliance upon a framework of proof that can explain only material conditions and physical realities through empirical quantification. The transformation of feminists ‘Mo feminism and the identification of patriarchy as the sole cause of all oppression is related in part to the current form of intercollegiate debate practice. By “form,” I refer to Kenneth Burke’s notion of form, defined as the “creation of appetite in the mind of the auditor, and the adequate satisfying of that appetite” (Counter-Statement 31). Though the framework for this understanding of form is found in literary and artistic criticism, it is appropriate in this context; as Burke notes, literature can be “equipment for living” (Biilosophy 293). He also suggests that form “is an arousing and fulfillment of desires. A work has form in so far as one part of it leads a reader to anticipate another part, to be gratified by the sequence” (Counter-Statement 124). Burke observes that there are several aspects to the concept of form. One of these aspects, conventional form, involves to some degree the appeal of form as form. Progressive, repetitive, and minor forms, may be effective even though the reader has no awareness of their formality. But when a form appeals as form, we designate it as conventional form. Any form can become conventional, and be sought for itself – whether it be as complex as the Greek tragedy or as compact as the sonnet (Counter-Statement 126). These concepts help to explain debaters’ continuing reluctance to employ rhetorical proof in arguments about causality. Debaters practice the convention of poor causal reasoning as a result of judges’ unexamined reliance upon conventional form. Convention is the practice of arguing single-cause links to monolithic impacts that arises out of custom or usage. Conventional form is the expectation of judges that an argument will take this form. Common practice or convention dictates that a case or disadvantage with nefarious impacts causally related to a single link will “outweigh” opposing claims in the mind of the judge. In this sense, debate arguments themselves are conventional. Debaters practice the convention of establishing single-cause relationships to large monolithic impacts in order to conform to audience expectation. Debaters practice poor causal reasoning because they are rewarded for it by judges. The convention of arguing single-cause links leads the judge to anticipate the certainty of the impact and to be gratified by the sequence. I suspect that the sequence is gratifying for judges because it relieves us from the responsibility and difficulties of evaluating rhetorical proofs. We are caught between our responsibility to evaluate rhetorical proofs and our reluctance to succumb to complete relativism and subjectivity. To take responsibility for evaluating rhetorical proof is to admit that not every question has an empirical answer. However, when we abandon our responsibility to rhetorical proofs, we sacrifice our students’ understanding of causal reasoning. The sacrifice has consequences for our students’ knowledge of the subject matter they are debating. For example, when feminism is defined as a single entity, not as a pluralized movement or theory, that single entity results in the identification of patriarchy as the sole cause of oppression. The result is ignorance of the subject position of the particular feminist author, for highlighting his or her subject position might draw attention to the incompleteness of the causal relationship between link and impact Consequently, debaters do not challenge the basic assumptions of such argumentation and ignorance of feminists is perpetuated. Feminists are not feminism. The topics of feminist inquiry are many and varied, as are the philosophical approaches to the study of these topics. Different authors have attempted categorization of various feminists in distinctive ways. For example, Alison Jaggar argues that feminists can be divided into four categories: liberal feminism, marxist feminism, radical feminism, and socialist feminism. While each of these feminists may share a common commitment to the improvement of women’s situations, they differ from each other in very important ways and reflect divergent philosophical assumptions that make them each unique. Linda Alcoff presents an entirely different categorization of feminist theory based upon distinct understandings of the concept “woman,” including cultural feminism and post-structural feminism. Karen Offen utilizes a comparative historical approach to examine two distinct modes of historical argumentation or discourse that have been used by women and their male allies on behalf of women’s emancipation from male control in Western societies. These include relational feminism and individualist feminism. Elaine Marks and Isabelle de Courtivron describe a whole category of French feminists that contain many distinct versions of the feminist project by French authors. Women of color and third-world feminists have argued that even these broad categorizations of the various feminism have neglected the contributions of non-white, non-Western feminists (see, for example, hooks; Hull; Joseph and Lewis; Lorde; Moraga; Omolade; and Smith). In this literature, the very definition of feminism is contested. Some feminists argue that “all feminists are united by a commitment to improving the situation of women” (Jaggar and Rothenberg xii), while others have resisted the notion of a single definition of feminism, bell hooks observes, “a central problem within feminist discourse has been our inability to either arrive at a consensus of opinion about what feminism is (or accept definitions) that could serve as points of unification” (Feminist Theory 17). The controversy over the very definition of feminism has political implications. The power to define is the power both to include and exclude people and ideas in and from that feminism. As a result, [bjourgeois white women interested in women’s rights issues have been satisfied with simple definitions for obvious reasons. Rhetorically placing themselves in the same social category as oppressed women, they were not anxious to call attention to race and class privilege (hooks. Feminist Wieory 18). Debate arguments that assume a singular conception of feminism include and empower the voices of race- and class-privileged women while excluding and silencing the voices of feminists marginalized by race and class status. This position becomes clearer when we examine the second assumption of arguments about feminism in intercollegiate debate – patriarchy is the sole cause of oppression. Important feminist thought has resisted this assumption for good reason. Designating patriarchy as the sole cause of oppression allows the subjugation of resistance to other forms of oppression like racism and classism to the struggle against sexism. Such subjugation has the effect of denigrating the legitimacy of resistance to racism and classism as struggles of equal importance. “Within feminist movement in the West, this led to the assumption that resisting patriarchal domination is a more legitimate feminist action than resisting racism and other forms of domination” (hooks. Talking Back 19). The relegation of struggles against racism and class exploitation to offspring status is not the only implication of the “sole cause” argument In addition, identifying patriarchy as the single source of oppression obscures women’s perpetration of other forms of subjugation and domination, bell hooks argues that we should not obscure the reality that women can and do partici- pate in politics of domination, as perpetrators as well as victims – that we dominate, that we are dominated. If focus on patriarchal domination masks this reality or becomes the means by which women deflect attention from the real conditions and circumstances of our lives, then women cooperate in suppressing and promoting false consciousness, inhibiting our capacity to assume responsibility for transforming ourselves and society (hooks. Talking Back 20). Characterizing patriarchy as the sole cause of oppression allows mainstream feminists to abdicate responsibility for the exercise of class and race privilege. It casts the struggle against class exploitation and racism as secondary concerns. Current debate practice promotes ignorance of these issues because debaters appeal to conventional form, the expectation of judges that they will isolate a single link to a large impact Feminists become feminism and patriarchy becomes the sole cause of all evil. Poor causal arguments arouse and fulfill the expectation of judges by allowing us to surrender our responsibility to evaluate rhetorical proof for complex causal relationships. The result is either the mar-ginalization or colonization of certain feminist voices. Arguing feminism in debate rounds risks trivializing feminists. Privileging the act of speaking about feminism over the content of speech “often turns the voices and beings of non-white women into commodity, spectacle” (hooks, Talking Back 14). Teaching sophisticated causal reasoning enables our students to learn more concerning the subject matter about which they argue. In this case, students would learn more about the multiplicity of feminists instead of reproducing the marginalization of many feminist voices in the debate itself. The content of the speech of feminists must be investigated to subvert the colonization of exploited women. To do so, we must explore alternatives to the formal expectation of single-cause links to enormous impacts for appropriation of the marginal voice threatens the very core of self-determination and free self-expression for exploited and oppressed peoples. If the identified audience, those spoken to, is determined solely by ruling groups who control production and distribution, then it is easy for the marginal voice striving for a hearing to allow what is said to be overdetermined by the needs of that majority group who appears to be listening, to be tuned in (hooks, Talking Back 14). At this point, arguments about feminism in intercollegiate debate seem to be overdetermined by the expectation of common practice, the “game” that we play in assuming there is such a thing as a direct and sole causal link to a monolithic impact To play that game, we have gone along with the idea that there is a single feminism and the idea that patriarchal impacts can account for all oppression. In making this critique, I am by no means discounting the importance of arguments about feminism in intercollegiate debate. In fact, feminists contain the possibility of a transformational politic for two reasons. First, feminist concerns affect each individual intimately. We are most likely to encounter patriarchal domination “in an ongoing way in everyday life. Unlike other forms of domination, sexism directly shapes and determines relations of power in our private lives, in familiar social spaces…” (hooks. Talking Back 21). Second, the methodology of feminism, consciousness-raising, contains within it the possibility of real societal transformation. “lE]ducation for critical consciousness can be extended to include politicization of the self that focuses on creating understanding the ways sex, race, and class together determine our individual lot and our collective experience” (hooks, Talking Back 24). Observing the incongruity between advocacy of single-cause relationships and feminism does not discount the importance of feminists to individual or societal consciousness raising.War makes patriarchy more likely – proves the impact short-circuits the alternative
Spike Peterson and Anne Sisson Runyan (1993), in their discussion of gendered dichotomies, appear to drop Lacanian psychoanalytic discourse as an explanation for gendered dichotomies in favor of a more straightforward- ly political account.14Gendered dichotomies, rather than uniformly con- structing gendered social relations through universal psychoanalytic mecha- nisms, are seen more ambiguously, as playing a dual role. Where gendered dichotomies are used as an organizing principle of social life (such as in the gendered division of labor) they help to construct gender differences and in- equalities and thus are constitutive of social reality, but in positing a grid of polar opposites, they also serve to obscure more complex relationships, commonalties, overlaps, and intermediate positions (Peterson and Runyan 1993, 24–25). Elaborating on this view, it can be argued that gendered dichotomies are in part ideological tools that mystify, masking more complex social realities and reinforcing stereotypes. On one level, they do help to produce real gen- der differences and inequalities, when they are used as organizing principles that have practical effects commensurate with the extent that they become embedded in institutional practices, and through these, human bodies. They constitute one dimension in the triangular nexus out of which gender identities and the gender order are produced. But at the same time, institutional practices are not always completely or unambiguously informed by such dichotomies, which may then operate to obscure more complex relationships. It is a mistake to see the language of gendered dichotomies as a uniﬁed and totalizing discourse that dictates every aspect of social practice to the extent that we are coherently produced as subjects in its dualistic image. As well as the disruptions and discontinuities engendered by the inter- sections and interjections of other discourses (race, class, sexuality, and so on) there is always room for evasion, reversal, resistance, and dissonance be- tween rhetoric, practice, and embodiment, as well as reproduction of the symbolic order, as identities are negotiated in relation to all three dimen- sions, in a variety of complex and changing circumstances. On the other hand, the symbolic gender order does inform practice, and our subjectivi- ties are produced in relation to it, so to dismiss it as performing only an ide- ological or propagandistic role is also too simplistic.
With the loosening of the positivist/Realist hold on international relations and the simultaneous rise of feminist analysis, intellectual space has been created to address war in terms of the social relations of power between men and women. This development places war within a broader patriarchal matrix, and has helped to develop an understanding of war as one (obviously important) manifestation of patriarchal violence. This development also has promoted a more unassuming character with respect to the subject matter itself. The concerns lies less with warfare or its destructive potential (although this concern remains) than it does with the relationship between warfare and the oppression of women. Primary concern, that is, rests less with war than with the reproduction of patriarchy. This paper addresses the gender critique of war directly. It argues that the gender critique of war has racked enough to be able to identify a preliminary thesis regarding war and the reproduction of patriarchy. The altered experiences and practices of war, combined with the sometimes dramatic modifications in gender representations (through propaganda, literature etcetera), are considerable. War produces cultural crises of gender, especially as it throws the historical contingency and cultural arbitrariness of gendered constructs into relief. There is the suggestion that through war traditional gendered constructs can modulate and unwind. An emerging sense of cultural crisis revolving around gender shifts typically accompanies both war and post-war periods. Indeed, much of the initial research on gender and war, in view of the extensive shifts in representations and practices during war, directly or indirectly explores the emancipatory effect of war upon women. To the extent that war is contingent upon such gendered constructs, constructs that the practice itself appears to threaten and endanger, the relationship between war and gender might be said to be paradoxical. The paradoxical dynamic between gender and war, however, is softened by the profundity of the links between war and patriarchy. The gendering of experiences during war, along with the restoration of traditional gendered constructs after war, more than compensate for any war- induced sundering of the patriarchal tapestry. While the practice of war suggests that it might encourage a rupture in the gendered fabric of society, it overwhelmingly contributes to patriarchal reproduction. Questions oriented around the emancipatory potential of war where women are concerned, therefore, run the risk of losing a perspective on the overall role of modern warfare in the reproduction of women's oppression.
While these connections between war and male domination are suggestive, they do not amount to a clearly defined link between the two. It is too simplistic to say that male violence against women leads directly to organised mass warfare. Many soldiers kill in combat but are tender with their families; many male doctors are dedicated professionally to relieving suffering but batter their wives. The problem of war cannot be reduced to the problem of individual violence. Rather, social relations are structured to promote particular kinds of violence in particular circumstances. While there are some important connections between individual male violence and collective violence in war (rape in war is a notable one), these connections are more symptoms than causes of the relationship between patriarchy and other war-linked structures. Even the link between overt sexism and the military is being attenuated as war becomes more bureaucratised and face-to-face combat is reduced in importance. Typical military tasks in a highly technological military force include flying a plane, servicing a computer, operating communications equipment, administering supplies and supervising launching of missiles. Such tasks are similar to duties in the civilian workforce, and the need for highly developed sexism of traditional military training is not present. Military training and activity, though still containing much emphasis on brutality and obedience, is becoming more oriented to technical competence and bureaucratic performance. To the extent that women can perform as competent technicians or bureaucrats, they too can serve the war system effectively. Furthermore, the functional value of women to the military does not demonstrate an automatic connection between war and domination over women: while women's services may be useful to the military, they are not necessarily essential to its survival. To get at the connection between patriarchy and war, it is necessary to look at the links between patriarchy and both the state and bureaucracy, as well as between patriarchy and the military.
The world’s achievement in the field of poverty reduction is, by almost any measure, impressive. Although many of the original MDGs—such as cutting maternal mortality by three-quarters and child mortality by two-thirds—will not be met, the aim of halving global poverty between 1990 and 2015 was achieved five years early.
A new study led by Christopher Wimer and Liana Fox, researchers at Columbia University, calls the second claim into question. The safety net, they say, has saved millions of Americans from falling into poverty over the past four decades. Why are we just learning about this now? Well, it turns out we've been using bad statistics. “[S]tatistics using the official poverty measure do not provide an accurate picture of poverty or the role of government policies in combating poverty,” say the authors. The Census Bureau corrected this in 2010 by adopting a new measure that takes fuller account of nutrition and housing payments, means-tested transfers and social insurance programmes on one side of the ledger, and taxes on the other. Using similar methods, the authors recalculated poverty figures for the period of 1967-2010 and concluded:
The complexity of the cycle of poverty means that solutions need to be equally complex. Poverty is not just one cause but many, while our antipoverty efforts seem to focus on only part of the solution. Community developers are specialists in appreciating the interdependence of different parts of the community and their solution is to try to address issues like poverty from a multifaceted approach. Steps taken to break the cycle of poverty are necessarily complex, but they are a better solution to poverty than most single factor efforts, and it is embedded in some of the most successful anti-poverty programs from the community development corporations, local neighborhood revitalization projects, and other efforts linking grass roots problem solving with diversified organizational management. The limitations to the first four theories of poverty lead us to want to look closely at the cyclical theory. On the whole the cycle of poverty is rarely mentioned by poverty scholars but its success by programs such as the Family Independence Initiative (FII) in Oakland give hope. I highlight this program just as an example of the cycle breaking efforts of many innovative community based development organizations.
Skill compatibility: Why, then, is job growth reducing poverty less than it once did? It’s partly because the economy is not delivering the types of jobs that poor people can fill. As David Autor has shown, most of the job growth since the late 1980s has occurred within either the low-skill or high-skill sectors, with a consequent hollowing out of opportunities in the middle.2 One reason is that technological advances have led to the automation of (and ultimately to the displacement of) many jobs that involve “routine” tasks. Manufacturing jobs, which used to provide opportunities for workers with moderate levels of education (such as a high school diploma), have sharply declined. The Great Recession has exacerbated this trend, as employment losses have been most severe in middle-skill jobs, both in the white-collar and blue-collar sectors. The higher prevalence of jobs at the bottom should help the poor, but what’s unclear is whether the associated hollowing out in the middle is a countervailing force that increases the competition between the poor and those who had before secured middle-class jobs. All else being equal, this competition may increase unemployment at the bottom of the labor market or lower wages among those who do get jobs.
In sum, power is now more evenly distributed in the international system. As a result, there is rising geopolitical competition among great powers. But the nature of the competition is limited by two significant factors: their domestic preoccupations and their dependence on each other for economic growth. Conflict is therefore most acute along the periphery of great powers that are least integrated into the Western-led political order. Rising geopolitical competition usually happens through proxies rather than direct confrontation Ukraine, North Africa, and the Middle East are examples. The East China Sea is currently the only area of direct confrontation between two major powers. Competition among great powers has extended to the sea lanes that carry the world’s energy and trade and is visible in the naval buildup by all the major powers that we see today—a buildup over the last ten years which is unmatched in scale in history. At the same time, the prospect of conventional war between major powers remains low—victory in a major war is no longer a meaningful objective for any major power. The Consequences We should expect several consequences of the growing geopolitical competition among great powers: Following Edward Luttwak, we will give war a chance. In a series of regional crisis after crises, the great powers neutralize each other and avoid the hard political work needed to solve the crisis. Expect Libya, Syria, and other crises to continue to fester. The great powers’ ability to make systemic changes in the world order will remain in considerable doubt. For all the need to restore geopolitical balance where it has been upset, as in the Middle East, or to create a new open inclusive security architecture in the Asia-Pacific, there is no great power or group of great powers stepping forward to restore or create balance or to negotiate the balance of interests in troubled regions. On international issues, the level of productive cooperation among great powers is at an all-time low as demonstrated by the declining efficacy of the United Nations and other multilateral institutions. On global issues like climate change and trade talks, great powers are pursuing ad-hoc and regional pacts rather than the global solutions that confident major powers sought in the past. Regional powers will have more space to pursue their own ambitions, and take matters into their own hands. The fact that power is more evenly distributed among states, and even within states, means that the major powers’ ability to enforce peace or stabilize conflict is also limited. In cases like Yemen and Afghanistan, the major powers have no alternative but to relying on regional or local powers. Where there is no agreement among the regional powers as in Syria, the major powers are unable to impose their will or even agree on desirable outcomes. 
As mankind proceeds into the 21st century, four factors will drive modern states back toward a form of warfare resembling total war. Those four factors are: the cultural impacts of globalization, the continuation of the information age, financial trends, and populations’ involvement in war, or lack of participation. Yet these four factors will also, counter-intuitively, require a more moral form of warfare. Theory on the ways of war is the realm of both scholar and warrior; it is important that they study and understand the changing nature of war. In reference to globalization, the interdependencies created by the global trade market, will make it increasingly difficult for the United States to engage in war with current and potential trade partners. The geopolitical concerns of Mackinder, Ratzel, and Haushofer have all but dissolved as the world moves closer to a one-world community and one market. Modern trade, travel, and communications allow near-instant interaction and interdependency. Thomas Friedman argues that "the world is flat" and uses the example of the dizzying number of 45 suppliers required to fabricate one Dell laptop computer. Global corporations that straddle multiple countries are likely to temper hostilities and force interstate cooperation. Globalization thus will prevent the small, limited wars of the recent past. There will have to be a true casus belli, a high hurdle to leap, for any nation to enter into a war; therefore, however, those wars will most likely be total in nature. The Clauswitzian trinity demands a rational logic. "Subject to reason alone," small affronts might be overlooked, but great affronts, if they are to be answered at all, may be answered with total war. In conjunction with globalization, the continuing rise of the information age will impact nations and prevent the breakout of interstate wars, and it may propagate internal wars within dictatorships. The Arab Spring of 2011 and the impact of technology — specifically Google and Facebook — demonstrate the political mass effect of the Internet and social media. Arguably, these tools were both the impetus and information suppliers required for the put-upon people of North Africa to rise up against their oppressors. Such interconnectivity threatens dictatorships, but established nations are much less likely to go to war with neighbors as a result. Many reasons for past conflicts are disappearing; miscommunications are corrected in moments instead of months and information is shared. Information is power, and shared information, as exemplified by the One Laptop per Child program, allows the world’s less fortunate to capitalize on global knowledge and improve their condition. These programs aim to set the conditions for mutual success and reduce the competition for scarce resources and resulting war within and among developing nations. The third reason for the decline of warfare, and especially of limited war, is financial. Beyond the globalization and trade concerns, war has simply grown too expensive, especially for the United States. In the future, only the most severe reasons for war will justify the expense. Limited wars will not justify the expenditure, and thus will not be waged. Finally, there is the matter of popular involvement. Very few people per capita serve in the U.S. military. Indeed, many decry an increasing disconnect between the military and the people they serve. Bernard Brodie notes that American support for prolonged, limited wars is fleeting, and why should it not be? When nothing is asked of the polis, nothing should be expected. If ever there were a justification for modern total war, September 11, 2001, supplied it. More so than Pearl Harbor, a military target, the al Qaeda attacks and the ensuing Global War on Terror likely deserved a total response. Unfortunately, nothing was asked of the American populace. There was no call for conservation, no call for a war tax, and no call for conscription. Instead, at the request of the government, Americans went to the mall. Thus the nation must better select the wars it fights, by selecting only those wars it must fight. Total wars demand utilization of all the resources of the nation, and so are the ultimate disincentive to entering into conflicts. In the future, modern states, like the United States, will avoid secondary efforts such as limited wars. When nation-states engage in total wars, the state ensures the engagement of the populace by demanding something of them.
Last week, Alex Ward discussed the potential for a great power war between the United States and China. He framed his argument in terms of prominent international relations scholar Robert Gilpin’s “three preconditions,” as presented in his book War and Change in World Politics. Ward convincingly demonstrates that each of Gilpin’s preconditions is either close to being met in today’s world or has already been met, making the probably of a great power war between the U.S. and China, if not high, certainly non-zero. Ward notes that ” Gilpin’s framework serves as a good rubric by which to measure the current global climate,” noting further that “by all measures, this is certainly a dangerous time.”
One or two nuclear bombs, apparently, are aren’t all that destructive. In fact, “Vigilant Shield” included a hypothetical enemy nuclear strike against the Pentagon (which sits within sight of the Mall and just a short distance from the White House) that only killed 6,000 people. This remarkably low figure prompted journalist and Defense Department critic William Arkin to note that two of the core assumptions in the game were obviously that “nuclear warfare can break out for no particular reason at any particular time,” and that “small nuclear weapons, while bad, don’t really kill that many people.”
The same can be said of the DTOs, which are independent and competing entities — not an association like OPEC. The sale of cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and meth remains extremely profitable. The U.S. Justice Department has put the cartels’ U.S. drug trade at $39 billion annually. But the DTOs have diversified their business considerably, both to increase their profits and to exclude rivals from new sources of revenue. For example, they are dealing increasingly in pirated intellectual property, like counterfeit software, CDs, and DVDs. The most destructive new “product,” however, is people. The cartels have built a multibillion-dollar business in human trafficking, including the shipment of both illegal immigrants and sex workers. What the DTOs are really selling is logistics, much like Wal-Mart and Amazon.com. Wal-Mart was one of the first retailers to run its own fleet of trucks, providing tailored shipping at a lower cost that in turn gave the company an edge over its competitors. Similarly, Amazon may have started as a bookseller, but its dominance, as Fast Company put it, is “now less about what it sells than how it sells,” providing a distribution hub for all sorts of products. Drug-trafficking organizations are using the same philosophy to cut costs, better control distribution, and develop new sources of revenue. The one element of the U.S.-Mexico relationship that has received no shortage of attention is the border, yet the technology and money dedicated to enhancing security there have not been enough to thwart creative DTOs. The Sinaloa cartel, for example, has an extensive network of expertly constructed tunnels under the border, some featuring air-conditioning. (The workers who build the tunnels are frequently executed after the work is completed.) At the other extreme, traffickers have used catapults to launch deliveries from Mexico into the United States. Logistics, then, are the DTOs’ main source of revenue, and illegal drugs are but one of the products they offer. As the cartels’ revenue streams become increasingly diversified, the drug trade will become less and less important. In fact, the prospect of the DTOs’ selling their services to terrorists, say by transporting weapons of mass destruction across the U.S.-Mexico border, has begun to frighten analysts both inside and outside government. “But the Violence Is Unique to the Drug Trade.” No. The most brutal DTO battles are not over customers or suppliers but over ports and trade routes. The Mexican state of Michoacán, with its large Pacific port of Lázaro Cárdenas, has suffered a surge in violence as the remnants of La Familia Michoacana and the rising Los Caballeros Templarios fight for dominance. This May, Los Caballeros Templarios ambushed and shot 10 farmers after they met with government officials to protest cartel extortion. As one farmer described the DTO, “It’s like a monster with a thousand arms.” Brutality on Mexico’s borders is also largely a function of logistics, or so the pattern would suggest. On the U.S.-Mexico border, for instance, the city of Nuevo Laredo has been racked by violence for over a decade. Not coincidentally, the city’s northern edge lies less than a mile from Interstate 35, a north-south highway running through Dallas, Kansas City, and Minneapolis and connecting to major east-west routes. Mexico’s southern border has also seen a spike in violent crime, as the cartels move their products — guns, cocaine from Colombia, and immigrants from Central America — north to the United States. Cartels also use violence to further less concrete objectives. Spectacular acts, such as rolling severed heads onto a nightclub dance floor (as La Familia Michoacana did in 2006), are designed to shock and frighten, not to move product or attract customers. Assassinating the family of a Mexican marine who had participated (and been killed) in a raid against a DTO, as happened in late 2009, was an unambiguous threat against all law enforcement personnel. And the DTOs regularly threaten and kill reporters — Mexico is the fourth most dangerous nation in the world for journalists (behind only Syria, Somalia, and Pakistan), according to Reporters Without Borders — both to prevent the release of specific information about cartel activities and to discourage reporting on them in the first place. A recent narcomanta (“drug banner”) posted over two bodies hanging from a highway overpass in Nuevo Laredo sent a clear message: “This is going to happen to all of those posting funny things on the Internet.… I’m about to get you.”  Violence, in other words, is not a function of the drug trade specifically. It is how the cartels manage everything from marketing to public relations to human resources.
South America's cocaine industry is losing speed, according to recent reports, which suggests Colombia and Peru has seen a decline in production. Colombia's drug industry has been appraised at more than $10 billion, and the cultivation of coca has contributed to the worldwide movement and consumption of drugs, particularly in the U.S. Likewise, Peru, a nation that overtook Colombia as the world's leading coca and cocaine producer, has a transnational crime network that produces 340 tons of cocaine annually, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). But, both nations seem to be losing gusto. According to the United Nations, Peru's position as the No. 1 coca and cocaine exporter is fleeting. In recent years, crop levels dropped in Peru, and Bolivia's crops have diminished. And even though Colombia's level of crops have not changed, the nation has the highest number of drug busts and seizures in South America. However, seizures also have dipped 5 percent since last year. According to the International Narcotics Control Board (INCB), South American land covered by the coca plant dropped by a third in the last seven years. And though Colombia's cocaine territory is unchanged, production dropped by 25 percent between 2012 and 2013. Crop reduction signifies an impact on Colombia's economics of cocaine capitalism and its international consumer markets. And this has translated to lowered availability of Western Europe and U.S; it's tremendously low compared to its highest point. The INCB has insisted that the Integral and Sustainable Alternative Development program has contributed to Peru's recent decline. It's an initiative that's been credited with decreasing the household production of the coca bush by 35 percent in the last three years. According to Colombia Reports, the president of Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos, publicized a pilot program to address illegal crop substitutions in Putumayo to take effect in April 2015. He claimed fumigation wouldn't be necessary. Instead, the plan will integrate reparations through the Victims' Unit and with infrastructure improvements, reported newspaper El Espectador. Drug consumption and public health will also be addressed. Also, Colombian officials and FARC have come to the agreement that the FARC will abandon drug trade and trafficking to facilitate their legalization as a political association.
According to Mexican security analyst Alejandro Hope, “approximately 30 percent of cartels’ drug export revenues come from marijuana.” Though on one level marijuana legalization has little effect on the cartels’ ability to smuggle hard drugs like heroin into the United States, just reducing the cartels’ marijuana sales will reduce their power, influence, and wealth and should correspondingly reduce their ability to move heroin and other hard drugs across borders. Standing alone, any reduction in the drug cartels’ power and presence in Mexico and in Colombia would be a great achievement. We may already be seeing the results in Mexico of marijuana legalization in the United States. Violent crimes are decreasing in Mexico. Homicides hit a high in 2011, with Mexican police departments reporting almost 23,000 murders. Last year, they reported 15,649. It is both our responsibility and to our country’s benefit to help reduce the drug violence in Mexico and Colombia that we helped create. Legalizing marijuana is a pretty good place to start.
President Barack Obama’s State of the Union address illustrated what a dead letter federalism is among Democrats. Not that further illustration was necessary.¶ Federalism holds that the national government should limit itself to things of truly national scope. Things that are primarily of local concern should be left to state and local governments.¶ Federalism was a big deal to the founders. They wanted an energetic national government, but one that was confined to enumerated national functions. The founders also envisioned a bright line between the federal and state governments, each sovereign within their own spheres.¶ We are a long way from that. Today, the Democratic Party sees virtually nothing as outside the purview of the federal government. The Republican Party talks a good game about federalism, but usually ends up undermining the principle when it acquires national power.¶ Today, the lines between the federal government and state and local governments are hopelessly blurred. The federal government spends over $600 billion a year on grants to state and local governments. Arizona state government receives more in federal funds than it raises in general-fund taxes.¶ Today, state governments operate principally as service delivery mechanisms for federal social-welfare programs. This means that there is no real political accountability for the programs, which is why they grow and function like a blob.¶ If Medicaid costs are spinning out of control, who’s to blame and who should do something about it? The federal government that provides most of the funding and sets up the basic rules, or the state governments that actually administer the program? The food stamp program has grown astronomically of late. Purely a function of a bad economy, or is there something else going on? Whose job is it to figure that out?¶ President Ronald Reagan wanted to sort out the blob with his new federalism initiative, clearly making some functions, such as Medicaid, fully federal, while making other functions, including most welfare programs, fully state and local. There were some Democratic governors at the time, including Arizona’s Bruce Babbitt, who were also interested in a sorting out of responsibilities.¶ But agreement was never reached, nothing of significance happened. So, the blob endured and grew.¶ Obama proposes to feed it even more. The federal government should establish manufacturing innovation institutes in economically distressed areas and provide incentive grants to states to increase the energy efficiency of homes and businesses.¶ The federal government should fix 70,000 bridges and create a federal fund to modernize ports and pipelines. The federal government should have a new grant program to get high-school graduates better ready for high-tech jobs. And, according to Obama, the federal government should make sure that every kid has access to high-quality preschool.¶ The federal government, however, does not have a greater interest in the recovery of economically distressed areas than the states in which they are located, or greater insight into how to turn them around. Every bridge in America is located in a state and local community that has a greater interest in its condition than the federal government.¶ Every port and pipeline in the United States is located in a state and local community. If there are gains to be had from modernizing them, local governments have a greater incentive to get it done and done right than the federal government.¶ Every kid in America lives in a state and local community that is more interested in his education and workplace preparedness than the federal government. What do we really have to show for the increased federal involvement in education, under George W. Bush or Obama?¶ The federal government is broke, and broke in a way that threatens the American economy. Proposals that it do even more are surreal, even if they are supposedly paid for. If there’s loose change to be had, the federal government should use it to reduce the deficit, not further expand its reach.¶ It’s nowhere on the horizon, but a revival of Reagan’s new federalism discussion is badly needed.
Recent decisions from the Supreme Court delivered a one-two punch to American federalism. While media focus on the political impact of the immigration and healthcare decisions on the elections, our constitutional system is reeling from a blow of greater proportion.¶ In the first high-profile decision, Arizona substantially lost its battle to maintain a state immigration enforcement system. The dispute arose from the gap between what the feds say and what they do, specifically the failure to police immigration to the satisfaction of Arizona taxpayers.¶ The decision in Arizona v. United States was mostly about federal preemption of state law. And preemption law is notoriously fuzzy: “eye of the beholder” unfortunately characterizes the Court’s approach. The majority saw the Arizona case as an instance of Congress so thoroughly “occupying the field” that no room remained for state law. Justice Thomas, in a concise dissent, reasoned that Congress had not precluded state law such as Arizona’s, which merely echoes federal law.¶ Whatever one thinks of Justice Scalia’s dissent, he got the facts right. The difference between majority and dissenter perceptions turns in part on whether the President’s inaction in enforcing federal immigration law has preemptive significance. And certainly, as Scalia wrote, the Framers would have abhorred this result; the states always have cherished their borders. One columnist wryly noted that the Framers would not have signed a constitution abolishing slavery. True, but that deficiency of our Constitution was addressed through amendment. No amendment yet has erased state borders.¶ Preemption always poses a fuzzy question, but the Court’s ruling against Arizona takes a bite out of state power. Expansive federal inaction was read to displace a traditionally sound exercise of state police power that only sought to complement federal law—as written. The states now seem more than ever at the mercy of the federal government and its deep pockets to decide what is and is not the province of the state electorate.¶ So what local policy decisions will next take up residence between Capitol Hill and K Street? Healthcare, it seems. In NFIB v. Sebelius, the Court substantially upheld the national healthcare initiative advanced by the President, including the controversial individual mandate.¶ The Court majority rejected the mandate as an exercise of Commerce Clause power. But leaving academic jaws agape, the majority capitalized on a marginal, throw-it-at-the-wall-and-see-if-it-sticks Government argument that the penalty for failure to comply with the mandate was not a penalty at all—rather, a tax within the power of the Taxing Clause (as well as the Sixteenth Amendment, a further flimsy stretch).¶ The majority’s use of the Taxing Clause dealt another blow to federalism. Again pundits derided the dissent, this time for getting hung up on the infamous hypothetical of government-compelled broccoli consumption and stubbornly failing to acknowledge that the individual decision not to buy health insurance (inaction again) is itself a regulable commercial act.¶ The problem of federalism can get lost in the shuffle. But in using the Taxing Clause, the Court offered precious little in the way of limiting principles. Indeed, the Taxing Clause now seems poised to become Congress’s favorite new toy to run circles around the Commerce Clause and its carefully erected barriers to federal omnipotence. Whatever mandates formerly defied the reach of Congress may now be offered to individuals as a “choice,” and persons lacking the wisdom to choose correctly may be “taxed” accordingly. Congress need not even use the word “tax”; the Justices will strain their eyes to find a tax wherever a penalty lies.¶ Citizens refusing to buy their shares of broccoli admittedly seems far-fetched. Imagine instead a domestic airline industry on the brink of collapse. A federal bailout compels all persons to buy airline tickets—or to invest in troubled banks, or to subscribe to failing newspapers—it’s the patriotic choice, after all. Agoraphobic? Prefer to keep money under the mattress and get your news from TV? No problem; the “tax” on non-compliance comes due April 15.¶   Federalism is not an anachronism. The “United States” has—have—survived because of a well drawn balance between sovereign states and the federal government. This system of “vertical separation of powers” is one of our essential checks and balances, right along with the three branches of government (“horizontal separation of powers”) that kids learn about in grade school. Imbalance in this formula can spell catastrophe; think Civil War or European financial collapse.¶ Immigration and healthcare are critical public policy problems, but they are not intractable. Congress and the President have ample constitutional power at their disposal to achieve meaningful reforms without running roughshod over the States. Dismantling federalism is a shortcut with a steep price.
For 25 years now, a weak-state fixation has transfixed U.S. foreign policy. It all started with the humanitarian interventions of the 1990s, which advanced the idea that American power in a post-Cold War world could and should bring justice, peace, and prosperity to places like Somalia, Bosnia, Haiti, and Kosovo. Freed from the security constraints of superpower conflict, U.S. foreign policy assumed a more muscular moralism during Bill Clinton’s years. After the 9/11 attacks, shoring up weak states became a vital security interest, not just a humanitarian ideal. The Freedom Agenda of George W. Bush’s administration sought not only to strengthen states, but to transform them, spreading democracy abroad to protect democracy and security at home.¶ Today, this focus on weak states looks increasingly — what’s the word? — weak. Sure, some weak states (Pakistan, Pakistan, and Pakistan) loom large, posing serious challenges to U.S. interests. But the vast majority of weak states don’t. Instead, the most serious threats to American interests stem, as they always have, from states with sufficient capacity and power to do bad things in the world, not from states so weak that bad things happen within them.¶ It is worth stepping back and asking: How exactly do weak states threaten the global order or the United States’ vital interests? The weak-state crowd has offered three related but distinct arguments. The first and most compelling is that fragile states can become terrorist strongholds that pose existential threats to Western ways of life. If al Qaeda could carry out the worst attack on U.S. soil since Pearl Harbor by setting up shop in the lawless rubble of Afghanistan, the thinking goes, other lawless spaces could, similarly, devolve into sanctuaries for the recruitment, training, and deployment of terrorists. Most frightening of all: the specter of terrorists acquiring nuclear weapons.¶ The second, less convincing argument is that poorly governed spaces function as incubators for other global “bads,” like disease, conflict, human rights violations, drug and human trafficking, and criminal networks. In this view, weak states generate unwanted outcomes, not existential threats. That’s a big difference. The central purpose of U.S. foreign policy is not eliminating global suffering, however horrible. It is to protect vital national interests from grave dangers.¶ The third and fuzziest argument of the weak-state crowd holds that globalization connects citizens throughout the world in unprecedented ways, binding the fates of strong states to weak states. This vision, however, is more aspirational than real. Although it is certainly true that ideas, goods, and people can cross borders faster and more densely than at any time in history, we are still a long way from a world where the well-being and security of Nashville hinges on the stability of Ngozi. Yet Barack Obama’s administration has been making this argument for years. As candidate Obama wrote in a signature 2007 Foreign Affairs article, “the security and well-being of each and every American depend on the security and well-being of those who live beyond our borders.… We have a significant stake in ensuring that those who live in fear and want today can live with dignity and opportunity tomorrow.” Just this month, the administration’s 2015 National Security Strategy proclaimed yet again that weak states are one of the “top strategic risks to our interests,” putting transnational organized crime right up there with the use of nuclear weapons. Incredibly, the strategy proclaims that it “establishes … a diversified and balanced set of priorities appropriate for the world’s leading global power with interests in every part of an increasingly interconnected world.”¶ But a “diversified and balanced set of priorities” is no priority list at all. The United States does not have interests in every part of an increasingly interconnected world. It does not risk American lives and spend American political capital everywhere. Nor should it. Global leadership is about setting priorities — identifying what matters most and deploying resources to succeed. And evidence increasingly suggests that weak states should not be so high on the list.¶ Even the strongest weak-state claims don’t look so strong anymore. Nearly 14 years after 9/11, Islamist terrorism has yet to morph into anything close to an existential threat. That’s not to say it couldn’t grow into one — catastrophic terrorist attacks may be black-swan events that defy easy prediction. And it is impossible to know whether we have successfully countered terrorism thanks to the war on terror or because terrorists were never such a big danger in the first place. Yet it is hard to dismiss the gnawing, emerging evidence that 9/11 may have been more outlier than harbinger.¶ In 2012, John Mueller, senior research scientist at the Mershon Center for International Security Studies at Ohio State University, and Mark Stewart, director at the Centre for Infrastructure Performance and Reliability at the University of Newcastle, noted that Islamist terrorism was responsible for 200 to 400 deaths worldwide each year, outside of war zones. That’s roughly the same number of Americans who die from drowning in bathtubs annually. Harvard University’s Graham Allison darkly warned in 2004 that there was at least a 50 percent chance the world would suffer a nuclear terrorist attack in the next 10 years. It has now been 10 years and counting since he wrote that. The string of failed and foiled attacks on U.S. soil since 9/11, including “shoe bomber” Richard Reid, “underwear bomber” Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, and Times Square bomber Faisal Shahzad, more closely resembles the work of knuckleheads than masterminds.¶ The connection between weak states and transnational terrorism appears more tenuous too. Terrorism experts have found that the vast majority of terrorist attacks strike local targets, not foreign ones. What’s more, the world’s weakest states have not produced the world’s most or worst international terrorists. Foreign Policy’s 2014 Fragile States Index listed five countries in its worst-of-the-worst category: South Sudan, Somalia, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Sudan. None are major inspiration bases, training centers, breeding grounds, or exporters of terrorism directed at Western cities. Indeed, the January attack on the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo — France’s deadliest terrorist attack in 50 years — was perpetrated by two brothers born, raised, and radicalized almost entirely in the terrorist safe haven of France, which came in at No. 160 of 178 countries on the Fragile State Index.¶ Consider interstate war. Between weak states, wars can be destructive and destabilizing for local populations. Between strong states, wars can be destructive and destabilizing for the world. The war between Ethiopia and Eritrea was one thing; World War II was quite another. Even in a 21st-century interconnected world, conflict between powerful countries with large economies poses far greater direct threats to the global economy, international order, and American interests than wars between fragile states. Ethiopia and Eritrea posted a combined GDP of $51 billion in 2013 — less than the revenues of Google.¶ While the Cold War’s end led many to believe that wars between great powers had been rendered to the dustbin of history, Russia’s recent invasion of Ukraine and China’s ongoing provocations in the South and East China seas should remind us that great powers can still behave badly. Conflicts between powerful countries are not such distant possibilities after all. Had NATO enlargement grown a little larger, Ukraine would today be a member of the alliance, and the United States could very well have found itself locked in a European land war with Russia. Similarly, America’s long-standing security commitments to Japan and Taiwan make China’s aggressive military modernization and belligerent posturing in the region a potential flash point for future conflict between the world’s largest economies. Beijing’s naval maneuvering around the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands (also claimed by Japan), its aggressive claims to territory in the South China Sea (contested by Taiwan, Brunei, Vietnam, the Philippines, and Malaysia), its 2013 declaration of an air-defense identification zone, and its two decades of double-digit defense spending increases, all raise the odds of conflict with the United States and its regional allies through deliberate action, miscalculation, accidental escalation, or some combination.¶ The specter of conflict between these powerful states may be unwanted, but that doesn’t make it unlikely. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine seemed unimaginable until President Vladimir Putin imagined it. China’s “peaceful rise” may also turn out to be more wishful thinking. And that’s to say nothing of the risk and impact of interstate war between India and Pakistan, two nuclear powers with deep grievances and a history of miscalculation.¶ The most serious cyberthreats also appear to require substantial state capacity. Sure, Russian criminal networks and teenage hackers are busy stealing and selling millions of credit card numbers. And the Target and Home Depot breaches were certainly serious threats to Target and Home Depot customers. But not all cyberattacks are created equal.¶ Three types of cyberattacks most directly threaten U.S. national interests: large-scale theft of intellectual property, which can undermine national economic competitiveness and sap the source of American power; disabling attacks on military communications and operations than could impair the country’s capacity to attack and defend itself; and attacks on critical infrastructure that could disrupt the U.S. economy and society on a massive scale. Evidence suggests that all three types require state capacity far beyond what Cheetos-eating kids or criminals can muster.¶ The massive theft of intellectual property from American companies is directed, aided, and abetted principally by the Chinese government. The recent Sony hack was attributed to the government of North Korea. The most damaging cyberattacks abroad have also been sourced to organized states, not ungoverned spaces. The 2012 Saudi Aramco attack, which erased data from 30,000 computers — three-quarters of the company’s PCs — was traced back to Tehran. And the Stuxnet virus that disabled Iran’s nuclear centrifuges is estimated to have taken months to create, required 15,000 lines of code (120 times longer than your typical malware), and demanded the dedicated efforts of the best cyberwarriors in the Israeli and U.S. governments.¶ Finally, even the most frightening weak-state scenario, nuclear terrorism, isn’t even really about weak states. For years, Islamist terrorist groups have declared their fervent desire to obtain and use nuclear weapons. Why haven’t they succeeded? Because the most important ingredient, fissile material, cannot be developed in remote terrorist hideouts in ungoverned spaces that lack basic Internet or plumbing. Instead, readily usable fissile material rests in the hands of a small number of states with substantial governance and scientific capacity. Of the world’s nine nuclear-armed states, five — the United States, Britain, France, Israel, and India — are strong and stable democracies. China and Russia may lack democracy, but not the capacity to govern. Pakistan and North Korea are worryingly weak and rightly rise to the top of the counterproliferation agenda.¶ But the point is this: Nuclear terrorism is not a “weak-states” problem. It is a specific-states problem, where a handful of countries play an outsized role in producing, spreading, and securing fissile material — whether it is Iran’s development of a covert nuclear weapons program, Russia’s efforts to secure its loose nukes, Pakistan’s command and control of its mobile nuclear weapons, or North Korea’s nuclear recklessness. Some of the states that we need to keep fissile material out of the hands of terrorists are weak. Most are not.¶ Weak states pose a number of challenges, and Washington must do what it can to address them. But the emphasis must be on “do what it can.” The world is too dangerous a place to combat state weakness wherever it lives, to conflate ideals with interests, or to make the analytical mistake of treating so many threats as “weak-state problems.” Increasingly, it appears that the most serious threats to American national interests emanate from states with capacity, not states without it.
There is an increasing trend in Western capitals to label everything as a security threat, and the question of failed states faced the same fate; weak and failed states are included in a voluminous amount of security sources and are portrayed as both direct and indirect security menaces from which the West should watch out. Yet, in many cases, theoretical frameworks on the matter seem not to resist when matched to empirical analyses on the topic (Logan & Preble, 2011). Using official statements, a failed state is “a security concern, as it provides fertile ground for terrorism, drugs, and the like” (White Paper, USAID 2003, 4). Yet, there is no agreed definition or notion on the features that distinguish a weak or a failed state from those ‘functioning-states’ belonging to the international system. Although the data collected by a number of Indexes such as, for instance, the Human Development Index, the State Fragility Index and the Failed States Index, which use of a large range of economic/political/security criteria to draw up their lists could, at first glance, appear appropriate, a comparative analysis of these tools reveals different outcomes. Indeed, while some countries appear in all of these lists, other states are present in some guides but not in others and vice versa (Newman, 2009).¶ The outcome is that, perhaps, the way the state is conceived itself, together with the understanding of security, needs to be called into question. The different results of these indices reveal, to some extent, that there might be different ways to envision statehood as well as security threats. Which ‘qualities’ define a state as such? And what does constitute a security threat? These inquiries are at the centre of a theoretical security debate on the notion of state and security (Menkhaus, 2004). Generally, approaches to the concept of failed states have undergone from inadequacies as the lack of a clear description of what these states should actually look like and the leaning of grouping all of these countries in one big basket without considering the different contextual characteristics and weaknesses of each unit (Patrick, 2007). Henceforth, the epistemological recurring errors in several scholars’ scrutinises can be attributed to the conventional inclination of placing these countries in one single “catch-all ‘failed states’ category” (Patrick, 2007, 647).¶ The fictional character of the Westphalian state model¶ In a realist, Westphalian alignment, security is still comprehended according to its referent entity, the state, fundamental unit of examination in international security (Newman, 2009). States are then viewed as unitary rational actors that play in an anarchical system and which are compelled simply by the might of other units (Krasner, 2001). Thus, a difference in capabilities of states is an enduring feature of the global configuration (Jackson, 1990). Essentially, realism believes in the sovereignty of these elements and in a security perspective grounded on a military distribution of power in an anarchic international arrangement, where inter-state conflicts should still constitute the major security concern for states. With regard to failed states, then, security concerns may arise from threats such as terrorism and enforced migrations (Newman, 2009). Security threats deriving from weak and failed states are thus regarded as ‘indirect’ threats to Western societies. Including threats such as terrorism and immigration in the security discourse retrieves that rhetoric of the ‘others’ who menace the underlying ideals of Western countries (Busumtwi-Sam, 2002). Undeniably, the 9/11 terrorist attacks and the relative decline in number of inter-state conflicts arose the Western concern for the implications of states failures, and this made the construction of failed states as a security issue possible, becoming the “quintessential example of securitization: the process by which issues are accorded security status or seen as a threat through political labelling, rather than a result of their real objective significance” (Newman, 2009, 343). Such a marking gives the green light to Western governments for the implementation of inequitable policies in the global South (Patrick, 2007).¶ Moreover, the definition of a ‘failed state’ itself presumes the reflection of an ideal type that, in this case, is the conception of statehood. State is defined in accordance to the Western idea of it (Newman, 2009; Bilgin & Morton, 2002) and this, as it will be later considered, constitutes one of the basic information needed to understand the broader phenomenon of state failure and, chiefly, the manifestation of the breakdown of several states in the African continent. The archetype state in Western standards is the one formulated in 1648 during the ‘Peace of Westphalia’ and the resulting Westphalian model provides an image of how a sovereign state should look like. Expressly, a state should be established on the fundamental principles of territory, mutual recognition, independence and authority (Krasner, 2001). Hence, states exist within territories and “political authorities are the only arbiters of legitimate behaviour” (Krasner, 1995, 116).¶ Yet, such an ontological construction of the state could fit the actual international distribution only when these elements could be termed as ‘impermeable’ (Herz, 1957). In fact, the Westphalian model has never truly match reality (Newman, 2009). The sovereign state system is basically an intellectual draft typified by an ‘organised hypocrisy’ due to the lack of connection between formal rules and actual practices. There are constructivist statements arguing that the sovereign state standard is not a ‘generative grammar’ but rather a system from which states can diverge. Sovereignty as a principle is given by the shared understanding of which actions a sovereign state should then implement in its internal and foreign affairs (Krasner, 2001) and it can be thus argued to be more a social production arising from specific practices rather than a given settled classification (Bilgin & Morton, 2002). Sovereignty is hence made by the conjunction of the approved external recognition and by the authority exercised by officials on their territory; well-functioning states accomplish both whereas weak and failed states do not. Several failed states did receive formal legal recognition by the international community but, yet, are not able to exercise control over their land and such an external recognition brings with it the implication of non-intervention, another pillar in the sovereign principle edifice, in these countries domestic affairs (Krasner, 2001).¶ The prohibition of intervention in other states’ domestic affairs constitutes the ‘negative’ side of sovereignty, which led to the formal international rule of laissez faire. The positive side of the principle is instead defined by the actual competences of a government to employ power and control over its territory and, conversely from the negative aspect, it is subject to change. The arrangement of the two sides of the same sovereignty coin goes to constitute the well-known Robert Jackson’s formulation (1990) of the ‘sovereign game’. This definition turns out to be particularly convenient for our inquiry on failed states since it seems to perfectly capture the sovereign paradox that characterises a number of Third World countries that do experience the independence from external ‘intrusion’ but that, at the same time, are unable to deliver public services (Newman, 2009). Labelling a state with the term ‘failed’ does not take into accurate account that, although many countries in the global South own a legal external recognition, have never been de facto states (Patrick, 2007). Moreover, failed states are considered ‘failed’ to the extent that they do not correspond to the Westphalian model of statehood that was created in a entirely different atmosphere from the one in which the world finds itself now, and such a construction has implications on how Western governments conceive security and security threats (Del Rosso Jr., 1995).¶ The political construction of the ideal state appears to serve the major powers, and the Western societies more in general, interests and security agendas (Newman, 2009). The imposition of the notion of statehood does in fact reflect, to some degree, the political hegemony exercised by the global North towards the global South. This hegemony, grasped in Coxian terms as dominance of an accepted knowledge that does not leave space to alternatives (Cox, 1981), imposes a Western shared concept of statehood and development, which also puts boundaries on how security should be understood. When statehood is an imposed model and every state ends up looking as a made-in-series unit, security issues of one particular state tend to be addressed in a flawed manner (Bilgin & Morton, 2002). Also, for those states that do not conform to this model, labelled with the terms of ‘weak’ and ‘failed’ states, the only way of development is the one created to the image of those states belonging to the global North; so adapting to the economic laissez faire of the market and to political liberalism seems to be the paths to follow (in a liberal, democratic peace thesis sense) in order to leave the status of underdevelopment (Bilgin & Morton, 2002).¶ According to the liberal standpoint on global politics, Westphalian sovereign states are the elementary units of the international configuration, which, similarly to the realists’ view on it, are rational and autonomous actors that try to expand their power in the system (Krasner, 2001). Both realists and liberals thus conceive the state failure as the inability of the states to adapt to a certain model; yet, the problem of failure is comprehended in two dissimilar manners. For liberals, the problem lies in the resolution of market flops whereas for realists the concern is with conflicts spill-overs (Krasner, 2001). These schools of thought are though feeding the concern linked with the phenomenon of state failure by portraying it as an indirect, however harmful, threat for the West.¶ Failure is now considered to be the greatest threat to international stability (Atwood, US Agency for Int. Dev. in Del Rosso Jr., 1995). This shift in the security realm can be attributed to the fact that, in the post Cold War (CW) era, structures (and principally the figure of the state) “have been deconstructed before our eyes” (Del Rosso Jr., 1995, 196). While for some scholars the way in which we conceive statehood affects the perception of threats deriving from state failure (Buzan, 1983), for others the phenomenon has “arguably become the single-most important problem for international order” (Fukuyama, 2004 in Patrick, 2006, 27). Truly, the sovereign states prototypical represented by the Westphalian system never matched with reality and “the time of absolute and exclusive sovereignty has passed” (Boutros-Ghali, 1992, 3:17). Certainly, the occurrence of failures in several countries of the developing world seems to confirm this thesis. Besides, what can be argued to be the factors that determine whether a state can be considered a success or a failure (Milliken & Krause, 2002) when the state is a merely “abstraction, an entity existing chiefly in the hearts and minds of people” (Strayer, 1993 in Del Rosso Jr., 1995, 178)?¶ Failed states and non-traditional security threats¶ It has been said that orthodox scholars’ concerns with failed states are linked to the fear that the security issues existing in global South countries could expand and ‘hit’ Western societies. The greatest apprehension is definitely caused by terrorism. This concern derives from the assumption that failed states can provide fertile grounds for harbouring of terrorist organisations since these countries do not exercise a true control over their lands, and the link between the failed states of Afghanistan or of Sudan and al Qaeda, in this respect, are ‘proves’ that ungoverned areas constitute a point of attraction for terrorist groups (Patrick, 2007; Der Derrian, 2004). The ‘fertility’ is due to the possibility of disposing of areas where to recruit and train militants, and where to have a facilitate access to weaponries and economic supplies. With regard to accessing arms resources, the red alarm is tripped by the presumed probability in which terrorists might acquire biological, chemical or nuclear weapons (Patrick, 2006), which, in the hands of senseless players, would pose such a risky threat that the norm of sovereignty would not be enough to protect these states from external intervention (Fukuyama, 2004).¶ However, establishing a direct link between terrorism and failed states is, to some extent, naïve because it does not take into consideration that not all weak and failed states are plagued by terrorism and the case of Afghanistan is not enough to support the previous hypothesis (Patrick, 2007). Afghanistan can be better explained when other elements such as religion and politics are brought to the table; there is, thus, a series of components that need to be studied in each case. Also, the point that not all failed states attract terrorist groups is due to the fact that not all of them offer an ideal safe haven for these groups. Regions of total state collapse, as it is the case of Somalia, do not constitute idyllic places where to settle for terrorist organisations, but are indeed considered quite uncongenial. Terrorists do, in fact, prefer territories that are barely ruled rather than ungoverned and in the hands of tribal clans (Menkhaus, 2004). The formation of a logical tie between the two phenomena of terrorism and state failure actually infers that terrorist organisations could not survive in fully working states (again, the model of functioning state is imposed) because efficient governments would impede their operations (Newman, 2009).¶ State failure has also the collateral effect of making the people of a deteriorating state leaving the country, creating consequently massive refugee flows that destabilise neighbouring countries as happened in the case of Africa (Newman, 2009); for instance, since 1990, circa 100.000 exiles left Somalia and moved to bordering Kenya with the side-effect of fuelling some of the inter-ethnic strains existing in the country (Menkhaus, 2004). The primary concern is not related to the destabilisation of a region itself but rather to the following wave of immigration that would ‘disturb’ the global North countries (Newman, 2009). Specifically, immigration acquires an even greater role as a danger for wealthy societies when considered in relation with the spread of HIV/AIDS. With the memory, well bore in mind, of the refugee flows following the Haitian collapse and the Balkan hostilities, the European and the American governments are now willing to avoid the reappearance of similar situations (Singer, 2002). The impacts of these substantial immigration movements are deemed to be the fuse of a cultural conflict (‘clash of civilisations’) between different social configurations (Huntington, 1996).¶ Failed states are constructed and securitised by Western governments as catalysts of threats for their societies (Menkhaus, 2004), yet, the population trapped in these countries should be considered to be the very principal victim of their states failures and this, should be the first reason of concern for the international community (von Einsiedel, 2005). The inability of many Third World countries to provide public security (in all of its aspects) and the following chaotic consequences created, in such areas, authentic humanitarian disasters (Yannis, 2002). The attention should thus be driven from the ‘how failed states threaten the global North status quo dilemma’to the important aspects of ‘human security’. The security scheme of inter-state conflicts defined the functions of global politics for the majority of the human-beings history but should now leave space to a new way of conceiving security. In reality, for “most people today, a feeling of insecurity arises more from […] job security, income security, health security, environmental security, security from crime – these are the emerging concerns of human security all over the world” (Human Development Report, 1994, 3). The definition provided in this Report is based on two fundamental constituents, which are the essential safety for individuals from lasting threats such as disease, oppression, and famine, and security from violent interferences in the daily life of the people. Hence, security is here portrayed in a positive and progressive sense since it points out the importance of moral obligations among people (Busumtwi-Sam, 2002).¶ Human security presupposes the right of the person to be ‘free of fear’ and ‘free of want’, so basically to enjoy protection and well-being (Der Derrian, 2004). Nowadays, the greatest challenges to human security are those related to development and, in several countries of the developing world, where “the state is absent, the local population is left entirely at the mercy of unscrupulous political and economic entrepreneurs” (Poku et al., 2007, 1157). Also, the Western concerns with terrorist groups acquiring weapons of mass destruction (WMD) in failed states divert the attention from the real menace to security of the people and to the peace of these regions: the flow and illegal trade of small arms (Patrick, 2006). Third World countries had been particularly appealing receivers of arms allocations by the two world powers during the CW (Ayoob, 1995) and currently there are over 875 millions of small arms circulating worldwide (Geneva Small Arms Survey, 2014), where more than a quarter of these items are estimated to be in Africa (Ripsman & Paul, 2010). The low costs and wide availability of these small, however lethal, tools jeopardise the stability of states and regions by fuelling conflicts and by subjecting civilians to the rules of authoritarian clans, chiefly where the absence or the fragility of the state generates an ideal environment for black market affairs and illicit across-border trades (Patrick, 2006). The porous borders of failed states permit the passage of refugees and the exercise of arms smuggling. Giving data, the amount of arms introduced by Somali exiles in Kenya is approximately 5000 rifles per month (Menkhaus, 2004). Through borders, not only weapons, but also drugs and people become objects of criminal traffics (i.e. the cases of Colombia and Myanmar). This uncontrolled movement of people brings with it the spread of disease, affecting the health aspect of security of the population living in the neighbouring countries (i.e. Zimbabwe) (Newman, 2009).¶ The inability of weak and failed states to provide security to their own people is also reflected by the number of health issues that the locals have to face everyday. States, in many cases, are unable to deliver effective health services and the most serious issue of HIV/AIDS has now become part of the lives of a third of the adult population of the southern African continent (Elbe, 2006); and an approximate 70% of the HIV positive individuals of the world live in the continent (Kaplan, 1994). The HIV/AIDS disease does not simply affect the health aspect of human security but it does also constitute a hurdle for the economic development of the state (Ripsman & Paul, 2010). According to the World Bank, the virus can be assumed to be the principal threat to economic progress in Africa (Singer, 2002). The illness seems, in fact, to affect the more productive section of the society (Singer, 2002; Barnett, 2006; McInnes, 2006) and this has serious impacts on the levels of production of these countries plagued by the virus. The health facilities expenses and the reduction of foreign investments lead to a significant reduction of the GDP that thus expands the gap of poverty and inequality within the society. However, establishing a nexus between the virus and the phenomenon of failure is quite arduous, since the instability caused by the disease has actual effects in societies where the deliver of health services is uneven and the levels of poverty reach elevated percentages (McInnes, 2006). Yet, the spread of the disease is framed as a security issue in Western capitals only to the extent that such a pandemic could expand until touching their societies (Elbe, 2006). International measures on the proliferation of the virus are then undertaken only when there is a perceived national security threat and “the securitisation of the disease removes the issue from more cosmopolitan and altruistic frameworks of health and development, locating it instead within a state-centric framework, where states are primarily concerned with maximising power and security, rather than with addressing wider humanitarian concerns” (Elbe, 2006, 129).¶ The centricity of the state in this approach goes beyond the case of disease but, as already noted, involves every possible threat that might derive from the occurrence of states failure. Dangers are constructed in a securitisation process by the major powers policy-makers as scapegoats to divert the attention from their societies’ troubles to the developing world and to justify their policies towards this latter (Newman, 2009). Indeed, by displaying the potential threats incubated in failed states as menaces to the Western life style, societies are persuaded of a ‘false vulnerability’ (Logan & Preble, 2011). ¶ State failure in Africa¶ The notion of statehood, understood in Westphalian terms, had been applied/imposed in the African continent during the decolonisation process in the sixties/seventies (Ignatieff, 2005). Although independence from the colonial dominion had been a great attainment for the locals, the application of a European notion of sovereignty, seen as the exercise of an effective governmental control over a specific territory, just did not fit with the African context (Herbst, 1996; Milliken & Krause, 2002). The new wave of liberation brought to the new countries a simple juridical recognised independence but, once again, theory did not find any empirical confirmation (Jackson, 1990), and the creation of new states, with artificial confines that unobserved the cultural background, and the absence of a proper governmental control turned out to be a naïve effort of projecting the Western state model in a completely different setting (Del Rosso Jr., 1995; Poku et al., 2007). New entities were then labelled with the term ‘state’ but the population within these ‘states’ did not enjoy any of the rights stemming from the freshly gained juridical autonomy, and such a condition of ‘quasi-states’ reflected a shortage of domestic nation-building processes in favour of external recognition (Jackson, 1990).¶ Additionally, the rise of so many new states after the process of decolonisation caused a shift in the international configuration and introduced a high quantity of new members in the system (Ayoob, 1995) that were crafted and instilled by the principle of self-determination and, simply imagining the hypothesis of state failure was considered to be repulsive towards the principle itself (Helman & Ratner, 1993). The sudden disruption in the configuration of the international system shifted the ‘sovereignty game’ to a new dimension based on the value of self-determination and on the development claims of these disadvantaged nations, which nowadays is reflected in the existing friction between sovereignty privileges and external interventions in case of great human rights violations (Jackson, 1990). In several occasion, the principle of sovereignty has been claimed to prevent external interventions in questions related to the suffering of the local population in terms of health, environment and drugs/human trafficking (Helman & Ratner, 1993).¶ African countries provide a striking example of how the application of the Westphalian notion of statehood in the continent is at the root of the instability of many areas and of the resulting human suffering. The rapid course of decolonisation left some unqualified administrations to rule over portions of territory that did not experience any form of administrative arrangements since the colonial dominion was majorly exercised in the urban zones of a land. This made the development of dominant subnational groups and entities possible, and, in several instances, these constitute the actual authorities over specific areas in a country (Herbst, 1997; Duffield, 2005). Warlordism, a clan centred form of authority, is now a spread phenomenon in the continent (i.e. Somalia, Sierra Leone, Liberia, DRC) and this is significant to the extent that it implies that sovereignty is thus a social construction arising from conventional practices (Bilgin & Morton, 2002).¶ The work of William Reno (1999), a milestone in the field, understands Warlordism in relation to their type of ‘political economy’ defining them as egotistic actors whose main interest is the increase of their power and whose command fail to deliver whichever public service to their communities. However, Reno’s analysis lacks an account on the important role of the hegemony established by these lords, which are respected and supported by their population who would not otherwise have any other kind of rule or ‘protection’ (Marten, 2007). The absence of a superior authority, ethnic tensions and the easy access to weapons leave ample space to conflict outbursts (Herbst, 1997; Gupta, 1993). Internal civil wars have a massive impact on the people. The rapid spread of diseases among soldiers have effects on the larger population (Patrick, 2006) and conflicts trap the countries into political and social quagmires that do not allow them to provide not even basic services; and their consequences are echoed by a long-term wave of poverty, instability and a situation where countries experience a “victory of guns over normal politics […] with autocrats that deny freedom to their people” (Crocker, 2005, 35). The human security threat of poverty is the cause of starvation and mortality between under five year old children (Poku et al., 2007). In the case of Somalia, the internal conflicts have also destroyed the education system and “by 2004 only 15% of children were attending primary school” (Marten, 2007, 70). Human security is more threaten in Africa then anywhere else, where the levels of poverty are higher than in the rest of the globe.[1] However, policies directed to the continent are still driven by Western national concerns with the containment of these threats outside of their societies, whereas there is an urgent necessity for a ‘people-centred’ tactic (Poku et al., 2007).¶ Conclusion: leaving Westphalia¶ The occurrence of the phenomenon of state failure is another sign that the Westphalian model is not supported by an empirical basis; it is rather a simple political construction that calls for a shift to a ‘post-Westphalian era’ (Newman, 2009). The Western notion of statehood tended to ignore the fact that many entities have never been actual states (i.e. African countries post-decolonisation), and to have a homogeneous vision of failed states that did not consider the different settings of each situation (Patrick, 2007). This is also reflected by the fact that while some countries are highlighted as security threats in Western capitals, as represented by the cases of Afghanistan or Somalia, others are essentially disregarded (i.e. Sierra Leone, Guinea Bissau) (Newman, 2009). The fiasco in addressing effective specific policies towards these countries can be thus attributed to a lack of understanding of the circumstantial dissimilarities of each case (Patrick, 2006; Migdal, 1988).
The need for a better appreciation of state ‘failure’¶ A better appreciation of state failure is not likely to materialise unless the socio- economic conjuncture within which such ‘failure’ emerges is analysed. However, little reference is commonly made to the processes through which these states have come to ‘fail’ whilst others ‘succeeded’. In other words, the conditions that allow for state failure to occur are almost never investigated (Milliken and Krause, 2002a is a significant exception to this generalisation). Yet, this is an important avenue for research because existing approaches are rooted in the assumption that ‘failures’ are caused by the intrinsic characteristics of certain states without neces- sarily reflecting upon their colonial background and/or their peripheral position in global politico-economic structures. The broader point to make is that the ways in which deepening our understanding of the factors that have led some states to ‘fail’ may also help us to take alternative action.¶ A second problem is that the contributors to present debates reduce state ‘success’ or ‘failure’ to an empirically observable capacity to manipulate (usually) coercive resources resulting in a not-so-democratic overtone of control and subordination (see Migdal, 1988 and 2001). Such insistence on the need for strong states to estab- lish stability and political control is again not new but reminiscent of Cold War approaches to modernisation and development in the less-developed world when explanations were sought for the prevalence, particularly in Latin America, of authoritarian rule and ‘strong’ state corporatist regimes.¶ Third, the stance of many contributors to state ‘failure’ analysis is reminiscent of the liberal peace ‘two worlds’ approach that has characterised post-Cold War debates on international security. The ‘two worlds’ – labelled as ‘core’ and ‘periph- ery’ by James Goldgeier and Michael McFaul (1992) – are represented as the zone of conflict (periphery) and zone of peace (core). The practical implication of the ‘two worlds’ approach is that the structural and constitutive relationships between the two realms of security are obscured. The only alternative left to the ‘failed’ states of the world is presented as that of becoming ‘strong’ states and joining the liberal peace. Yet what is left underemphasised is the centrality, for instance, of arms exports to many Western economies, which effectively underlines the contradictions at work in the making of the ‘zone of peace’ and ‘zone of conflict’. What sustains such relations within the arms trade industry, despite the critical voices raised by non-governmental organisations, is the representation of some states as ‘failed’ within ‘zones of conflict’. Therefore, the inherently unequal structural rela- tionships between the two zones are sustained.¶ Fourth, prevalent approaches to state failure and collapse, as ‘deviance’ from the norm, help to establish ‘both a justification and legitimacy for intervention’, thereby marginalising alternative approaches (and practices) (see Duffield, 2002, p. 1050). After all, as Milliken and Krause (2002b, p. 762) remind us, ‘what has collapsed is more the vision (or dream) of the progressive developmental state that sustained generations of academics, activists and policymakers, than any real exist- ing state’. Hence the authors’ call to analyse state failure (and collapse) as part of a ‘broader and more prevalent crisis in the capacities and legitimacy of modern states’ (Milliken and Krause, 2002b, p. 755).
WASHINGTON — President Obama has issued a form of executive action known as the presidential memorandum more often than any other president in history — using it to take unilateral action even as he has signed fewer executive orders.
The news that Deputy Defense Secretary Ash Carter is stepping down is unwelcome for those of us who are concerned about the health of civil-military relations in Barack Obama’s administration. No one is indispensable, but Carter has earned an unusual amount of respect on both sides of the partisan aisle and across the uniformed divide. (Full disclosure: Way back in the days of the Cold War, Carter was on my dissertation committee, which surely disposes me in his favor, though it probably doesn’t make him very sympathetic to me!)
